 
 
	 
				 
		 
		 
		 
		 
         
		 
		   
		  
		 
		  window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
		  function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
		  gtag('js', new Date());

		  gtag('config', 'G-88NRD2W5YY');
		 
		 2025 Form IT-201-I, Instructions for Form IT-201, Full-Year Resident Income Tax Return 
		   #tax-content .table-of-contents.expand-content .expand-link{padding-left:0;text-decoration:underline;color:var(--link-color);}#tax-content .table-of-contents.expand-content .expand-link:hover{color:var(--black);} 
	 
	 
				 
			 
				  Skip to main content  
				 Your browser will need to support JavaScript to use this site completely. Site functionality and usability will be disrupted. Additionally, videos, data, site search and notifications will be disabled or function poorly. 
				 
					  
				 
				 
					 
						 
							   Department of   Taxation and Finance   
							 
								    Main navigation menu  
								 
								 
									  Online services 
										 
											  Online Services home  
											  Make a payment  
											  Quick Pay (businesses and individuals)  
											  Apply for a personal income tax extension  
											  Request installment payment agreement  
										 
									 
									  Individuals 
										 
											  Individuals home  
											  Income tax credits  
											  Quick Pay  
											  E-file options  
											  Income tax filing resource center  
											  Check your refund  
											  Respond to a letter  
										 
									 
									  Businesses 
										 
											  Businesses home  
											  Sales and use tax  
											  Withholding tax  
											  Corporation tax  
											  Quick Pay  
											  Self-employment resource center  
											  Other taxes  
										 
									 
									  Tax professionals 
										 
											  Tax professionals home  
											  Registration and education  
											  Posting requirements  
											  Professional responsibility  
										 
									 
									  Real property 
										 
											  Real property home  
											  STAR  
											  Respond to a STAR letter  
											  Property owners  
											  Homeowner Benefit Portal  
											  Assessment community  
											  Real estate transfer tax  
											  Mortgage recording tax  
										 
									 
									  Forms and guidance 
										 
											  Forms and guidance home  
											  Form RP-5217-PDF  
											  Income tax rates and tables  
											  School district codes  
											  Current-year income tax forms  
										 
									 
									  Tax data 
										 
											  Tax data home  
											  Statistics and reports  
											  Open data  
											  Municipal Data Portal  
										 
									 
									  About 
										 
											  About us  
											  Employment opportunities  
											  Leadership  
										 
									 
								 
										
								 
                           	 
							 
								 
									  Search box  
									 
										 
											 Search entire Tax site 
											 
											  Search Tax  
										 
									 
								 
								 
									  Log in menu  
									 
										 Log in | Create account 
									 
								 
							 
                    				 
					 
					 
	            		             
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					 
					 
						  Department of Taxation and Finance  
						 Instructions for Form IT-201  Full-Year Resident Income Tax Return  
						  New York State • New York City • Yonkers • MCTMT  
 (including instructions for Forms IT-195 and IT-201-ATT) 
					 
					 
						 IT-201-I 
					 
				 
			 
			 	
			  Printer-Friendly Version (PDF)  
 
 
  Table of contents  
 
 
  General information  
  What’s new for 2025  
  File electronically  
  E-file information  
  Other forms you may need to file  
  Protect yourself from identity theft  
  File a valid return  
  Common words and phrases  
  Online Services  
  How to fill in the forms  
  How to get 1099-G information  
  New York State full-year residents: Who must file?  
  Step 1: Complete the taxpayer information section  
  Step 2: Select your filing status and complete items B through H  
  Step 3: Enter your federal income and adjustments  
  Step 4: Calculate your New York additions and subtractions  
  New York additions  
  New York subtractions  
  Step 5: Enter your New York standard or New York itemized deduction and dependent exemption amounts  
  Step 6: Calculate your taxes  
  Step 7: Add voluntary contributions  
  Step 8: Enter your payments and credits  
  Step 9: Calculate your refund or the amount you owe  
  Step 10: Sign and date your return  
  Step 11: Finish your return  
  Instructions for Form IT-195,  Allocation of Refund   
  Instructions for Form IT-201-ATT,  Other Tax Credits and Taxes   
  Additional information  
  How to calculate your 2025 New York State tax  
  New York State tax rate schedule  
  Tax computation—New York adjusted gross income of more than $107,650  
  How to calculate your 2025 New York City tax  
  New York City tax rate schedule  
  When to file/Important dates  
  Statute of limitations  
  Where to file  
  Need help?  
 
 
 
 
   General information 
 Up-to-date information affecting your tax return 
  For tax law changes or forms corrections that occurred after the forms and instructions were finalized, see  Personal income tax up-to-date information  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  corrections ). 
   What’s new for 2025 
 For a detailed list of what’s new, including a summary of tax law changes, see  New for 2025  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  2025 ). 
   File electronically 
 Electronic preparation (e-file) is fast, easy, and secure. You may even qualify for  free filing options . For all your e-file options, see  Filing Season Resource Center  on our website. 
 For the fastest processing of your refund, combine e-file with  direct deposit . You can receive your New York State tax refund up to two weeks sooner than if you filed by paper and requested a paper check. 
 User-friendly e-file software ensures you file all the right forms and do not miss out on valuable credits. 
   E-file information 
 Using software?  
 You must e-file if your software allows you to e-file your return, or if you are a tax preparer who is subject to the e-file mandate. E-file is easy, safe, and allows you to get your refund faster. Most New York taxpayers e-file. 
 Make a payment 
 Pay a balance due by authorizing the Tax Department to withdraw the payment from your bank account. Authorize the payment when you e-file your return or make a return payment after you file your return using our  Online Services . You may also pay with a credit card. 
 For more information, see  Make a personal income tax return payment  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  pay ). 
   Other forms you may need to file 
 If you do file a paper return, see  Income tax full-year resident forms  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  full ). 
 For a complete list of credits, see  Income tax credits  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  credits ).  Reminder:  To claim a tax credit (with the exception of the household credit and New York City school tax credit), you  must  complete and submit the appropriate credit form. 
 New York City forms 
 If you need to get New York City tax forms and instructions or information about New York City business taxes, contact the New York City Department of Finance: 
 
 Online: Visit  www.nyc.gov/finance  
 By online message: Visit  www.nyc.gov/contactdof  
 By phone: From any of the five boroughs in New York City, call 311. From outside New York City, call  212-639-9675 . 
 
   Protect yourself from identity theft 
 Identity theft is the unauthorized use of personal information such as: 
 
 Social Security number 
 credit card number 
 
 Identity thieves can file forged tax returns to collect fraudulent refunds and victims may not be aware their identities have been stolen. 
 Protect your identity by writing only the last four digits of your Social Security number on any check or money order you send to the Tax Department. You must include your complete Social Security number on your return and payment voucher. We cannot process these forms without the complete number. 
 For more information, or if you think you have been a victim of tax-related identity theft, see  Identity theft affecting your tax records  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  fraud ). 
   File a valid return 
 If the paper form you are using has a year under the New York State map in the upper-left corner, you can only use that form for that tax year. 
 To file a complete return, you must: 
 
 complete all required schedules and forms that make up your return, 
 include all pages of those forms and schedules when you file, 
 submit  only  those forms and schedules that apply to your return, and 
 confirm you made all required entries. 
 
 If you submit your return with missing pages or missing entries, we cannot process it and you may be subject to penalty and interest. 
   Entering whole dollar amounts 
 When you enter amounts on your return, enter  whole dollar amounts only . This includes amounts on any credit forms, schedules, or other forms you submit with your New York State return. 
 Do  not  enter any cent amounts. We preprinted the zeros in that box. Instead, round cents to the nearest dollar using the following rules: 
 
 Drop amounts that are less than 50 cents. For example, $1.39 becomes $1. 
 Increase amounts that are 50 cents or more to the next dollar. For example, $2.50 becomes $3. 
 
   Common words and phrases 
 To enhance clarity, these instructions may use common abbreviations, including: 
 
  EIC =  earned income credit 
  IRC =  Internal Revenue Code 
  IRS =  Internal Revenue Service 
  MCTMT =  Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax 
  NYS =  New York State 
  NYC =  New York City 
 
   Online Services 
 Create an Online Services account and log in to: 
 
 make payments 
 view your filing and payment history 
 get email notifications for refunds, bills, and notices 
 sign up for electronic communications about refunds, bills, and notices 
 
 Access is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 For more information, see  Online Services  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  online ). 
   How to fill in the forms 
 As you complete your form, follow these guidelines to avoid processing delays: 
 
 Use black ink only (no red or other color ink or pencils) to print or type (if you are using a fill-in form) all entries. 
 If you are entering a loss (an amount less than zero), place a minus sign  immediately to the left  of the loss amount. Do not use brackets or parentheses. 
 Mark an   X   to fill in boxes as appropriate. Do not use a check mark. Keep your   X  s and numerals inside the boxes. 
 Do not write in dollar signs or commas when you enter amounts or numbers. 
 
   How to get 1099-G information 
 If you received an income tax overpayment, including a refund, from us in 2025, you may need information from Tax Department Form 1099-G,  Statement for Recipients of State Income Tax Refunds,  to complete your federal return. We do not mail this form. To view and print a copy, see  Get your 1099-G information online  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  1099-G ). 
 If you received unemployment benefits in 2025, you must report the information from Department of Labor (DOL) Form 1099-G,  Statement for Recipients of Certain Government Payments , on your federal and New York State returns, if required to file. 
 For unemployment compensation or pandemic unemployment benefits, DOL will  not  mail you Form 1099-G. To access this form: 
 
 
 
 Visit the DOL website at  https://dol.ny.gov  and see  1099-G Tax Form: Information you need for UI income tax filing . 
 Log in to your NY.gov ID account. 
 Select Unemployment Services and View/Print 1099-G. 
 
 
 
   New York State full-year residents: Who must file? 
 You must file a New York State resident return if you meet  any  of the following conditions: 
 
 You must file a federal return. 
 You did not have to file a federal return but your federal adjusted gross income for 2025 plus New York additions was more than $4,000 ($3,100 if you are single and can be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s federal return). 
 You want to claim a refund of any New York State, New York City, or Yonkers income taxes withheld from your pay or from your unemployment insurance benefit payments. 
 You want to claim any refundable or carryover  credits . 
 
 If you were a New York State resident for only part of the year, do not file Form IT-201. If you moved into New York State on any day other than January 1, or moved out of New York State on any day other than December 31, see  New York nonresidents and part-year residents  .  
 Additional notes to all filers 
 
 Do you have to  submit other forms ? See  Full-year resident forms  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  full ). 
 Do you want to claim tax credits? See  Income tax credits  to learn about refundable and nonrefundable credits you may qualify for or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  credits ). 
 Does your child have  investment income  over $2,700? It would be to your advantage to file a New York State return for your child to report your child’s investment income, since there will be no New York tax on the first $3,100 of that income. When you file your federal return, report your child’s investment income on federal Form 8615 (instead of federal Form 8814). If you file Form 8814, the amount of your child’s investment income over $2,700 that was included in your federal gross income will be reported on your New York State return and taxed at your rate. 
 Did you file federal Form 1040-SR,  U.S. Tax Return for Seniors ? As you review your New York State income tax forms and instructions, read any reference to federal Form 1040 and its schedules as a reference to federal Form 1040-SR. 
 
   New York nonresidents and part-year residents 
 If you were a nonresident or a part-year resident of New York State and you received income from New York sources in 2025, you must file Form IT-203,  Nonresident and Part-Year Resident Income Tax Return.  For more information on residency, see  Am I considered a New York State resident for income tax purposes?  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  resident ). 
 Separate returns are required for some married taxpayers who file a joint federal return. 
 If one of you was a New York State resident and the other was a nonresident or part-year resident, you must each file a separate New York return. The resident must use Form IT-201. The nonresident or part-year resident, if required to file a New York State return, must use Form IT-203. However, if you both choose to file a joint New York State return, use Form IT-201 and both spouses’ income will be taxed as full-year residents of New York State. 
 Filing information for same-sex married couples 
 Same-sex married couples have the same state tax benefits and requirements as different-sex married couples filing and paying New York State personal income tax. In addition, as a result of the Supreme Court’s decision  United States v. Windsor , and IRS Revenue Ruling 2013-17, for federal tax purposes the IRS will recognize a marriage between a same-sex couple that is a legal marriage under the laws of the jurisdiction (either domestic or foreign) where the marriage was performed. Therefore, you must determine your filing status using the general married filing status rules (see  Item A  under Step 2, select your filing status, and complete items B through H) .  
 The term  spouse  should be read as gender-neutral and includes a person in a marriage with a same-sex spouse. The term  marriage  includes a marriage between same-sex spouses. 
 Filing information for military servicemembers and their spouses 
  Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (SCRA):  New York State conforms to the SCRA. Therefore, for any tax year of the marriage, a servicemember and their spouse may elect to use, for purposes of taxation, any of the following (regardless of the date they married): 
 
 the residence or domicile of the servicemember 
 the residence or domicile of the spouse 
 the permanent duty station of the servicemember 
 
  Note:  To make an election as described above, see Item G, Codes M4 through M9. 
   Step 1: Complete the taxpayer information section 
 Name and address 
 Write the following in the spaces provided: 
 
  Name:  Your first name, middle initial, and last name. If you are married and filing a joint return, enter both spouses’ names. 
  Mailing address:  Your mailing address (where you want to receive your mail) can be the same as, or different from, your permanent home address (where you actually live). Enter your current mailing address where you want us to send your refund, if requested, and any correspondence related to your return. PO Box or street address, city, state, ZIP code, and country. 
 
  Note:  Do  not  abbreviate the country name. 
 Foreign addresses 
 Enter the information in the following order: 
 
 city, 
 abbreviation for the province or state, 
 postal code (follow the country’s practice), and 
 country (do  not  abbreviate the country name). 
 
 Taxpayer’s permanent home address 
 
 If your mailing address is different from your permanent home address (for instance, you use a PO Box), enter your permanent home address. Your  permanent home address  is the address of the dwelling place in New York State where you actually lived as of December 31, 2025, whether you or your spouse owned or rented it. 
 If you use a paid preparer and you use the preparer’s address as your mailing address, enter the address of your permanent home in the space provided. 
 If you are a permanent resident of a nursing home, enter the nursing home address. 
 If you are in the armed forces and your permanent home was in New York State when you entered the military, enter your New York permanent home address regardless of where you are stationed. 
 If you are married and maintain separate New York State residences and are filing separate New York State returns, enter the address of your own residence as your permanent home address. 
 If you moved after December 31, 2025, enter your permanent home address as of December 31, 2025, not your current home address. Enter your new home address in the mailing address area if you want your refund and other correspondence sent there. 
 
 Dates of birth and Social Security numbers 
 Enter your date of birth and  entire  Social Security number, and those of your spouse (if applicable). 
 New York State county of residence 
 Enter the county in New York State where you lived as of December 31, 2025. If you lived in New York City, use one of the following county names: 
  County names 
 
 
 If you lived in 
 enter 
 
 
 Bronx 
  Bronx  
 
 
 Brooklyn 
  Kings  
 
 
 Manhattan 
  New York  
 
 
 Queens 
  Queens  
 
 
 Staten Island 
  Richmond  
 
 
 
 School district name and code number 
  Enter the name and code number of the school district where you live.  For a detailed list of the school district names and code numbers by county, see  School district codes  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  school district ). This is the public school district where you were a resident on December 31, 2025. It may not be the same as the district where your children attend school. 
  You must enter your school district name and code number  even if: 
 
 you were absent from the school district temporarily, 
 the school your children attended was not in your school district, or 
 you had no children attending school. 
 
 Decedent information 
 
 If the taxpayer whose name is listed  first  on the return died after December 31, 2024, and before you filed your return, enter the date of death in the box labeled  Taxpayer’s date of death , in month, day, and year (four-digits) order. 
 If the taxpayer whose name is listed  second  died after December 31, 2024, and before you filed your return, enter the date of death in the box labeled  Spouse’s date of death . 
 
 For more information, see  Deceased taxpayers . 
 In addition, you must make the appropriate entry at  Item G  if you qualify for a 90-day extension of time to file your return because your spouse died within 30 days before the  due date of your return . For more information, see  When to file/important dates . 
   Step 2: Select your filing status and complete items B through H 
   Item A 
 In most cases, you must use the same filing status you used on your federal return. If you did not have to file a federal return, use the filing status you would have used if you had filed. 
 Exceptions 
 The only exceptions are for certain married couples filing a joint federal return in the following situations: 
 
 One spouse is a New York State resident and the other is a nonresident or part-year resident. In this case, you must either:
 
 file separate New York returns using filing status ③; or 
 file jointly, as if you both were New York State residents, using filing status ②. 
 
 
 
 In this case, you may file a separate New York return using filing status ③. 
 
 You are unable to file a joint New York return because:
 
 the address or whereabouts of your spouse is unknown, and 
 you can demonstrate that reasonable efforts have been made to locate your spouse, and 
 good cause exists for the failure to file a joint New York return. 
 
 
 
 In this case, you may file a separate New York return using filing status ③. 
 
 You are unable to file a joint New York return because:
 
 your spouse refuses to sign a joint New York return; and 
 reasonable efforts have been made to have your spouse sign a joint return; and 
 there exists objective evidence of alienation from your spouse such as:
 
 judicial order of protection; 
 legal separation under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance; or 
 living apart for the twelve months immediately preceding application to file a separate return, or commencement of an action for divorce or commencement of certain family court proceedings; and 
 
 
 good cause exists for the failure to file a joint New York return. 
 
 
 
 In this case, you may file a separate New York return using filing status ③. 
 Item B 
 If you itemized your deductions on your 2025  federal  income tax return, mark an   X   in the  Yes  box. If you claimed the standard deduction on your  federal  return, mark an   X   in the  No  box. 
 Item C 
 If you can be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s federal return, you must mark an   X   in the  Yes  box. You must mark the  Yes  box even if the other taxpayer did not claim you as a dependent. For example, if another taxpayer was entitled to claim you as a dependent on their federal return, but chose not to so that you can claim the federal education credit, you must mark the  Yes  box. 
 Item D1 
 If you marked   Yes   on federal Schedule B (Form 1040),  Interest and Ordinary Dividends , Part III then mark an   X   in the  Yes  box. 
 Item D2 
  All  IT-201 filers  must  complete item D2. 
 If you or your spouse (if married filing jointly) maintained or had use of an apartment or  living quarters  in Yonkers during any part of 2025 (whether or not you personally used those living quarters for any part of the year), you must mark an   X   in the  Yes  box on line D2(1). Enter in the applicable box the number of months you and your spouse (if filing a joint return) lived in Yonkers during 2025. 
  Living quarters  include a house, apartment, co-op, or any other dwelling that is suitable for year-round use, that  you or your spouse maintain or pay for,  or that is  maintained for your primary use  by another person, family member, or employer. 
  Example:   Company A leases an apartment in Yonkers for the use of one of the company’s officers, and the apartment is mainly available to that individual. That individual is considered to be maintaining living quarters in Yonkers even though others might use the apartment on an occasional basis.  
   Notes:   
 
 If you marked the  Yes  box on line D2(1), you may be considered a resident or part-year resident for Yonkers income tax purposes. The determination of residency is based on the facts and circumstances of your own situation. See  Income tax definitions  or visit our website at  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  resident ). If you meet the definition of a Yonkers resident or part-year resident, see  line 55 : Yonkers resident income tax surcharge or  line 57 : Part-year Yonkers resident income tax surcharge instructions below. 
 If you marked the  Yes  box on line D2(4), you may be subject to the Yonkers nonresident earnings tax. See  line 56 : Yonkers nonresident earnings tax instructions below. 
 
 Item E 
  If you are a full-year New York City resident (this includes the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, and Staten Island), leave item E   blank.  
  All other  IT-201 filers  must  complete item E. 
 If you or your spouse (if married filing jointly) maintained or had use of an apartment or  living quarters  in New York City during any part of 2025 (whether or not you personally used those living quarters for any part of the year), you must mark an   X   in the  Yes  box on line E(1) and enter the number of days you were in New York City, even if on personal business, on line E(2). 
 If you are married  filing jointly  and both spouses spent days in New York City, enter the higher number of days on line E(2). 
 Do not count days traveled through New York City to use a common carrier such as an airplane, train, or bus. 
  Living quarters  include a house, apartment, co-op, or any other dwelling that is suitable for year-round use, that  you or your spouse maintain or pay for,  or that is  maintained for your primary use  by another person, family member, or employer. 
  Example:   Company A leases an apartment in New York City for the use of one of the company’s officers, and the apartment is mainly available to that individual. That individual is considered to be maintaining living quarters in New York City even though others might use the apartment on an occasional basis.  
  Note:  If you marked the   Yes   box on line E(1) and you spent 184 days or more (any part of a day is a day for this purpose) in New York City, you may be considered a resident for New York City income tax purposes. The determination of residency is based on the facts and circumstances of your own situation. See the definitions of  Resident  ,   Nonresident  ,  and  Part-year resident  in these instructions. If you meet the definition, complete the New York City resident taxes and credits lines (47 through 53, 64, and 69 through 70a) on Form IT-201. 
 Item F 
 New York City  residents and part-year residents only:  Enter in the applicable box the number of months you and your spouse (if filing a joint return) lived in New York City during 2025. We need this information to verify your New York City school tax credit. 
  All other taxpayers: Leave Item F blank.  
   Item G 
 If you qualify for one or more of the special conditions below, enter the specified two-character code. 
 Code A6 Build America Bond interest 
 Enter this code if you included Build America Bond interest in your federal adjusted gross income. For additional information, see  TSB-M-10(4)I ,  Treatment of Interest Income from Build America Bonds,  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  TSB-M-10(4)I ). 
 Code C7 Combat zone 
 Enter this code if you qualify for an extension of time to file and pay your tax due under the combat zone or contingency operation relief provisions. Visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  military ). 
 Code D9 Death of spouse 
 Enter this code if you qualify for an automatic 90-day extension of time to file your return because your spouse died within 30 days before the due date of your return. 
 Code K2 Combat zone, killed in action (KIA) 
 Enter this code if you are filing a return on behalf of a member of the armed forces who died while serving in a combat zone. For information on filing a claim for tax forgiveness, visit  www.tax.ny.gov    (search:  military ). 
 Code E3 Out of the country 
 Enter this code if you qualify for an automatic two-month extension of time to file your federal return because you are out of the country. For additional information, see  When to file/Important dates . 
 Code E4 Nonresident noncitizens 
 Enter this code if you are a U.S. nonresident noncitizen for federal income tax purposes and you qualify to file your federal income tax return on or before June 15, 2026. The filing deadline for your New York State return is also June 15, 2026. 
 Code E5 Extension of time to file beyond six months 
 Enter this code if either of the following conditions applies: 
 
 You qualify for an extension of time to file beyond six months under § 157.3(b)(1)(i) of the personal income tax regulations because you are outside the United States and Puerto Rico. You must submit a copy of the letter you sent the IRS to request the additional time to file. 
 You received a federal extension to qualify for the federal foreign earned income exclusion, or the foreign housing exclusion or deduction, or both. Submit a copy of the approved federal Form 2350,  Application for Extension of Time to File U.S. Income Tax Return . 
 
 Code 56 Losses from Ponzi-type fraudulent investment arrangements 
 Enter this code if you had a  Ponzi-type  fraudulent investment and are reporting a New York State theft loss deduction (itemized deduction) using the federal safe harbor rules. Also submit a copy of the statement you made in accordance with federal Revenue Procedure 2009-20. 
   Code C2 Request an installment payment agreement 
 Enter this code if you cannot pay your tax due in full by April 15, 2026, and would like to request an installment payment agreement (IPA). You cannot apply for an IPA until you receive a bill. Once you do, follow the payment instructions on the bill. 
 You will continue to accrue penalties and interest (if applicable) on any unpaid balance of tax due for the duration of your IPA. For more information, see  Installment payment agreement (IPA)  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  IPA ). 
 Codes M4 through M9 Servicemembers Civil Relief Act 
 Are you making an election under the SCRA to select a residence for state income tax purposes? If  yes , enter the applicable codes. 
  Code M4:  You are a military servicemember and you are electing to use your own state of legal residence or domicile for state income tax purposes.   Code M5:  You are a military servicemember and you are electing to use your spouse’s state of legal residence or domicile for state income tax purposes.  Code M6:  You are a military servicemember and you are electing to use the state where your permanent duty station is located for state income tax purposes.  Code M7:  You are a civilian spouse of a military servicemember and you are electing to use your own state of legal residence or domicile for state income tax purposes.  Code M8:  You are a civilian spouse of a military servicemember and you are electing to use the servicemember’s state of legal residence or domicile for state income tax purposes.  Code M9:  You are a civilian spouse of a military servicemember and you are electing to use the state where the servicemember’s permanent duty station is located for state income tax purposes. 
 For additional information, see  Information for military personnel and veterans  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  military ). 
 Code Y1 Spouses with different Yonkers resident status 
 Enter this code if you are filing jointly (filing status ②) and  only one spouse  was a full-year Yonkers resident and the other spouse was a Yonkers nonresident for the tax year. See the instructions for  line 55 . 
 Item H 
 Enter the required information for each  dependent  you claimed on federal Form 1040. Also enter the required information for any dependent you were entitled to claim on your federal return but chose not to (see  Example  below). If you did not have to file a federal return, enter the required information for each dependent you would be entitled to claim for federal income tax purposes. 
  Example:   You were entitled to claim your child as a dependent on your federal return but chose not to in order to allow them to claim a federal education credit on their federal tax return. You may still claim them as a dependent on your New York State return.  
 If you have more than seven dependents and are filing a paper return, attach a separate sheet marked   Form IT-201: Item H continued   to your return with: 
 
 your name and Social Security number at the top, and 
 the required information for each additional dependent. 
 
  Note:  If you are married filing a joint federal return but are required to file separate returns for New York State, complete item H as if you filed separate federal returns. For more information about filling separate returns, see  filing status  in Step 2. 
   Step 3: Enter your federal income and adjustments 
 Lines 1 through 19: Federal income tax return information 
 The calculation of your New York State, New York City, and Yonkers income tax is based on the information you reported on your federal income tax return, including your income and federal adjustments to income. If you did not file a federal return, you must report the same income and adjustments that you would have reported for federal income tax purposes if you had filed a federal return. 
 The amount entered on  line 1  (wages, salaries, tips, etc.) should be the same as the amount reported on federal Form 1040, line 1z. 
 Be sure to enter your total other income on  line 16  and your total federal adjustments to income on  line 18 . Write each type of income and each adjustment and its amount in the  Identify  areas on lines 16 and 18. If you need more room, submit a list on a separate sheet showing each type of income and each adjustment and its amount. 
 Enter only  whole dollar amounts  on your New York return. 
 Do  not  leave line 19 blank. 
   Step 4: Calculate your New York additions and subtractions 
 Overview 
 The calculation of your New York State income tax is based on your New York adjusted gross income. Your New York adjusted gross income is your federal adjusted gross income after certain New York additions and New York subtractions (modifications). 
 New York State taxes certain items of income not taxed by the federal government. You must add these  New York additions  to your federal adjusted gross income. 
 Similarly, New York State does not tax certain items of income taxed by the federal government. You must subtract these  New York subtractions  from your federal adjusted gross income. See below and  Form IT-225 ,  New York State Modifications , and its  instructions . 
 Partners and S corporation shareholders 
 If you have income from a partnership or S corporation, include any New York adjustments that apply to that income. The entity should provide you with this information. For important information regarding these modifications, see the  instructions  for Form IT-225. 
 If you have either of the addition or subtraction modifications in the chart below, relating to your partnership or S corporation income, include the amount on the corresponding line of Form IT-201. 
 
 
 
 Modification code 
 Description 
 Line number 
 
 
 EA-113 
 Interest income on state and local bonds and obligations 
 20 
 
 
 ES-125 
 Interest income on U.S. government bonds 
 28 
 
 
 
 For all other additions and subtractions relating to your partnership and S corporation income, complete Form IT-225. 
   Beneficiaries (estates and trusts) 
 If you have income from an estate or trust, any New York adjustments that apply to that income, as well as any additions to or subtractions from federal itemized deductions, will be shown in your share of a single fiduciary adjustment. 
 
 If the adjustment is a net addition, enter the amount and addition modification number  EA-   901   on Form IT-225, line 5. 
 If the adjustment is a net subtraction, enter the amount and subtraction modification number  ES- 901   on Form IT-225, line 14. 
 
 When you have completed Form IT-225, transfer the amounts to Form IT-201 as instructed on Form IT-225. 
 If you filed federal Form 4970,  Tax on Accumulation Distribution of Trusts : 
 
  do   not  include on Form IT-201, line 11 the income you reported on Form 4970, line 1 because the IRC considers the distribution part of federal gross income. 
  do  include on your Form IT-225, line 5 the amount of  income you reported on Form 4970, line 1,   after subtracting   any interest income on state and local bonds and obligations of New York State and its local governments  that you included on Form 4970, line 5. See addition modification number A-114 in the instructions for Form IT-225. 
 
   New York additions 
 Line 20: Interest income on state and local bonds and obligations 
 Do you have interest income from state and local bonds and obligations from states other than New York State or its local governments? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 21. 
 If   Yes  , enter any such interest income that you received or that was credited to you during 2025 that was  not  included in your federal adjusted gross income. This includes interest income on:
 
 state and local bonds, 
 interest and dividend income from tax-exempt bond mutual funds, and 
 tax-exempt money market funds that invest in obligations of states other than New York. 
 
 
 
 If you purchased a bond between interest dates, include the amount of interest you received during the year, after subtracting the seller’s accrued interest (the amount accrued from the interest date preceding your purchase to the date you purchased the bond). You should have received this information when you purchased the bond. 
 If you sold a bond between interest dates, include the amount of interest you received during the year plus the accrued interest amount (the amount accrued from the interest date preceding the date you sold the bond to the date you sold the bond). You should have received this information when you sold the bond. 
 For purposes of this addition, bond premium amortization is not allowed as a direct offset to interest income. You must report it: 
 
 as a subtraction modification on Form IT-225—if the bond premium is attributable to a trade or business,  or   
 as an itemized deduction addition adjustment on Form IT-196, line 44—if the bond premium is  not  attributable to a trade or business, but  only  if you itemize. 
 
 Line 21: Public employees 414(h) retirement contributions 
 Are you a public employee of New York State or its local governments? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 22. 
 If   Yes  , enter the amount of 414(h) retirement contributions, if shown on any federal Form W-2, W age and tax statemen t if you are:
 
 a member of the New York State and Local Retirement Systems, which include the New York State Employees’ Retirement System and the New York State Police and Fire Retirement System; 
 a member of the New York State Teachers’ Retirement System; 
 an employee of the State or City University of New York who belongs to the Optional Retirement Program; 
 a member of the New York City Employees’ Retirement System, the New York City Teachers’ Retirement System, the New York City Board of Education Retirement System, the New York City Police Pension Fund or the NYC Fire Department Pension Fund;  or  
 a member of the Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority (MABSTOA) Pension Plan. 
 
 
 
 Do not enter contributions to a § 401(k) deferred arrangement, § 403(b) annuity, or § 457 deferred compensation plan. 
 Line 22: New York’s 529 college savings program distributions 
 Did you make a nonqualified withdrawal during 2025 from an account established under  New York’s  529 college savings program? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 23. 
 If   Yes  , the withdrawal is a nonqualified withdrawal and you must complete the Line 22 worksheet. 
 
 A withdrawal from a  New York 529  college savings program is considered nonqualified  unless  it is used:  
 
 to pay the qualified higher education expenses of the designated beneficiary at an eligible educational institution as defined in Education Law § 695-b(5) (even if the amount withdrawn is reinvested in New York’s college savings program within the IRC 60-day rollover period), 
 to pay the qualified postsecondary credentialing expenses of the designated beneficiary at an eligible educational institution  on or after  July 4, 2025, 
 to pay the principal and interest on any qualified education loan [as defined in IRC § 221(d)] of the designated beneficiary or a sibling of the designated beneficiary  on or after  September 5, 2024, 
 to make a rollover to a Roth IRA as provided for in IRC § 529(c)(3)(E)  on or after  September 5, 2024, 
 for any purpose, provided the withdrawal is the result of the death or disability of the designated beneficiary, or 
 to make a rollover of some or all its assets, either contributions or earnings, to a qualified Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) program. 
 
  Note:  Transfers between accounts of family members that are not disbursed in cash or in-kind within New York’s program are not considered distributions and therefore not required to be added back as nonqualified withdrawals. 
 Nonqualified withdrawals from a  New York  529 college savings program include, but are not limited to:  
 
 the transfer to another state’s program (whether for the same beneficiary or for the benefit of another family member) 
 any withdrawal used to pay tuition and related expenses in connection with enrollment or attendance at elementary or secondary public, private, or religious schools because higher education generally means public or private, non-profit or proprietary post-secondary educational institutions, in or outside New York State 
 any withdrawal used to pay the principal or interest on any qualified education loan [as defined in IRC § 221(d)] of the designated beneficiary or a sibling of the designated beneficiary  before  September 5, 2024 
 any withdrawal used to make a rollover to a Roth IRA as provided for in IRC § 529(c)(3)(E)  before  September 5, 2024 
 any withdrawal used for postsecondary credentialing expenses that are  not  paid to an eligible educational institution 
 
  Note:  Before you complete this worksheet, you must first calculate your Form IT-201, line 30, subtraction for  New York’s  529 college savings program for 2025. 
    Line 22 worksheet 
 
 
 1. Total current and prior years’ nonqualified withdrawals from your accounts 
 1. _________ 
 
 
 2. Total current and prior years’ contributions to your accounts 
 2. _________ 
 
 
 3. Total current year’s subtraction modification  (from line 1 of worksheet for line 30)  and prior years’ subtraction modifications *  
 3.  _________  
 
 
 4. Subtract line 3 from line 2 
 4. _________ 
 
 
 5. Total prior years’ addition modifications*  
 5.  _________  
 
 
 6. Add lines 4 and 5 
 6.  _________  
 
 
 7. Subtract line 6 from line 1. This is your current year addition. Enter this amount on Form IT-201, line 22 
 7. _________ 
 
 
 
 If line 7 is   0   (zero) or less, no entry is required on Form IT-201, line 22. 
 *Be sure to include all prior years’ addition and subtraction modifications. 
 Keep this worksheet with your copy of your tax return. 
 
 
 
 
 Line 23: Other additions 
 Use this line to report other additions that are not specifically listed on Form IT-201. 
 Enter on line 23 the amount from Form IT-225, line 9. Submit Form IT-225 with your return. 
   New York subtractions 
 Line 25: Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes 
  If  you received an inflation refund check from the Tax Department  and  included the check amount in the calculation of federal adjusted gross income reported on line 19,  then  enter that amount on line 25. 
 Checks were mailed in the fall of 2025. For more information, visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  inflation ). 
 Line 26: Pensions of New York State and local governments and the federal government 
 Did you receive a pension or other distribution from a New York State or local government pension plan or federal government pension plan that was included in your federal adjusted gross income? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 27. 
 If   Yes  , enter the amount of any pension you received—or any distributions made to you from a pension plan that represents a return of contributions in a year prior to retirement—as an officer, employee, or beneficiary of an officer or employee of any of the following:
 
 New York State, including State and City University of New York and New York State Education Department employees who belong to the Optional Retirement Program.  Optional Retirement Program members may only subtract that portion attributable to employment with the State or City University of New York or the New York State Education Department. 
 Certain public authorities, including:
 
 Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) Police 20-Year Retirement Program; 
 Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority (MABSTOA); and 
 Long Island Railroad Company. 
 
 
 Local governments within the state. 
 The United States, its territories, possessions (or political subdivisions thereof), or any agency or instrumentality of the United States (including the military), or the District of Columbia. 
 
 
 
 You may  not  subtract the following: 
 
 Pension payments or return of contributions that were attributable to your employment by an employer other than a New York public employer, such as a private university, and any portion attributable to contributions you made to a supplemental annuity plan which was funded through a salary reduction program. 
 Periodic distributions from government (IRC § 457) deferred compensation plans. 
 
 However, these payments and distributions may qualify for the pension and annuity income exclusion described in the  instructions for line 29 . 
 Nonemployee spouses 
 You may include distributions you received from a New York State or local pension plan or from a federal government pension plan as a nonemployee spouse in accordance with a court-issued qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) that meets the criteria of IRC § 414(p)(1)(A) or in accordance with a domestic relations order (DRO) issued by a New York court. 
 Line 28: Interest income on U.S. government bonds 
 Did you include interest income from U.S. government bonds or other U.S. government obligations on lines 2, 6, or 11? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 29. 
 If   Yes  , enter the amount of interest income you earned from bonds or other obligations of the U.S. government. 
 
 Dividends you received from a regulated investment company (mutual fund) that invests in obligations of the U.S. government and meet the 50% asset requirement each quarter qualify for this subtraction. The portion of the qualifying dividends that may be subtracted is based upon the portion of the taxable income received by the mutual fund that is derived from federal obligations. 
 Contact the mutual fund for additional information on meeting the 50% asset requirement and calculating your allowable subtraction (if any). 
 If you include an amount on line 28 from more than one line on Form IT-201, submit a schedule on a separate sheet showing the breakdown from each line. 
 Do not list the same interest more than once on lines 28 and 31; see the  instructions for Form IT-225 , subtraction modification numbers S-121 and S-123. 
   Line 29: Pension and annuity income exclusion 
 Did you enter an amount of pension income or annuity income, or both (generally reported on line 9 or 10) that was not from a New York State or local government pension plan or federal government pension plan? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 30. 
 If   Yes  , and you were 59½ before January 1, 2025, enter the qualifying pension and annuity income included in your 2025 federal adjusted gross income,  but not more than $20,000.  
 
 If you became 59½ during 2025, enter only the amount you received after you became 59½,  but not more than $20,000.  If you received pension and annuity income and are married, or received pension and annuity income as a beneficiary, see  Married taxpayers  or  Beneficiaries  below. 
  $20,000 limit : You may  not  take a pension and annuity income exclusion that exceeds $20,000, regardless of the source of the income. 
 Qualifying pension and annuity income includes the following: 
 
 periodic payments for services you performed as an employee before you retired 
 periodic and lump-sum payments from an IRA, but  not  payments derived from contributions made after you retired 
 periodic distributions from government (IRC § 457) deferred compensation plans 
 periodic distributions from an annuity contract [IRC § 403(b)] purchased by an employer for an employee and the employer is a corporation, community chest, fund, foundation, or public school 
 periodic payments from an HR-10 (Keogh) plan, but  not  payments derived from contributions made after you retired 
 lump-sum payments from an HR-10 (Keogh) plan, but only if federal Form 4972 is not used. Do  not  include that part of your payment that was derived from contributions made after you retired 
 periodic distributions of benefits from a cafeteria plan (IRC § 125) or a qualified cash or deferred profit-sharing or stock bonus plan [IRC § 401(k)], but not distributions derived from contributions made after you retired 
 
 Qualifying pension and annuity income does not include: 
 
 Distributions you received as a  nonemployee spouse  in accordance with a court-issued qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) that meets the criteria of IRC § 414(p)(1)(A) or in accordance with a domestic relations order (DRO) issued by a New York court. 
 Distributions you received as a result of an  annuity contract  purchased with your own funds from an insurance company or other financial institution. The payments are attributable to premium payments you made using your own funds and are not attributable to personal services you performed.  
 Employer nonelective and matching contributions that you designated to a Roth account under the SECURE 2.0 Act of 2022. 
 
   Married taxpayers 
 If you both qualify, you and your spouse can each subtract up to $20,000 of your own pension and annuity income. However, neither of you can claim any unused part of your spouse’s exclusion. 
  Example:   Taxpayer A and Taxpayer B, both age 62, included total pension and annuity income of $45,000 in their federal adjusted gross income on their joint federal tax return. Taxpayer A received qualifying pension and annuity payments totaling $30,000 and Taxpayer B received qualifying payments totaling $15,000. They are filing a joint New York State resident personal income tax return. Taxpayer A may claim the maximum pension and annuity income exclusion of $20,000, and Taxpayer B may claim an exclusion of $15,000, for a total pension and annuity income exclusion of $35,000.  
   Beneficiaries 
 If you received a decedent’s pension and annuity income, you may make this subtraction if the decedent would have been entitled to it, had the decedent continued to live, regardless of your age. If the decedent would have become 59½ during 2025, enter only the amount received after the decedent would have become 59½, but not more than $20,000. 
 If any portion of this exclusion was subtracted on the decedent’s personal income tax return, you must first reduce the amount you are eligible to claim by the same amount subtracted on the decedent’s return. The total pension and annuity income exclusion claimed by the decedent and the decedent’s beneficiaries cannot exceed $20,000. 
 If the decedent has more than one beneficiary, the decedent’s $20,000 pension and annuity income exclusion must be allocated among the beneficiaries. Each beneficiary’s share of the $20,000 exclusion is determined by multiplying $20,000 by a fraction whose numerator is the value of the pensions and annuities inherited by the beneficiary, and whose denominator is the total value inherited by all beneficiaries of the decedent’s pensions and annuities. 
  Example:   A taxpayer received pension and annuity income totaling $6,000 as a beneficiary of a decedent who was 59½ before January 1, 2025. The decedent’s total pension and annuity income was $24,000, shared equally among four beneficiaries. Each beneficiary is entitled to one-quarter of the decedent’s pension exclusion, or $5,000 ($20,000 multiplied by 0.25). The taxpayer also received a qualifying pension and annuity payment of $14,000 in 2025. The taxpayer is entitled to claim a pension and annuity income exclusion of $19,000 ($14,000 attributable to the taxpayer’s own pension and annuity payment, plus $5,000 received as a beneficiary*).  
 *The total amount of the taxpayer’s pension and annuity income exclusion that can be applied against the taxpayer’s pension and annuity income received as a beneficiary is limited to the taxpayer’s share of the decedent’s pension and annuity income exclusion. 
 Disability income exclusion 
 If you are also claiming the disability income exclusion (Form IT-225, S-124), the total of your pension and annuity income exclusion and disability income exclusion cannot exceed $20,000. 
   Line 30: New York’s 529 college savings program deduction/earnings distributions 
 Account owner 
 During 2025, did you, as an account owner, make contributions to or a withdrawal from one or more tuition savings accounts established under  New York’s  529 college savings program? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 31. 
 If  Yes , and you:
 
 as an account owner, made contributions ,  enter the amount up to $5,000 ($10,000 for married taxpayers filing a joint return) on line 1 of the  Line 30  worksheet. 
 as an account owner, made a withdrawal and part of the withdrawal was included in your federal adjusted gross income,  then  enter that amount on line 2 of the  Line 30  worksheet. 
 
 
 
    Line 30 worksheet 
 
 
 1. Amount of contributions you made in 2025 to an account established under  New York’s  529 college savings program (cannot exceed $5,000 for an individual, head of household, married taxpayers filing separately, or qualifying surviving spouse, or $10,000 for married taxpayers filing a joint return) 
 1. _________ 
 
 
 2. Amount of Qualified Tuition Program distribution included in your federal adjusted gross income 
 2.  _________  
 
 
 
 3. Add lines 1 and 2.  Enter here and on Form IT-201, line 30  
  Note:  Keep this worksheet for future-year calculations of the line 22 worksheet. 
 
 3. _________ 
 
 
 
 Beneficiary 
 During 2025, did you, as a beneficiary, receive a withdrawal from one or more tuition savings accounts established under  New York’s  529 college savings program? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 31. 
 If   Yes  , and you included part of the withdrawal in your federal adjusted gross income (and did not include it as an account owner on line 2 of the worksheet above), then enter that amount on line 30. 
 
 Line 31: Other subtractions 
 Use this line to report other subtractions that are not specifically listed on Form IT-201. 
 Enter on line 31 the amount from Form IT-225, line 18. Submit Form IT-225 with your return. 
 Line 33: New York adjusted gross income 
 Do  not  leave line 33 blank. 
   Step 5: Enter your New York standard or New York itemized deduction and dependent exemption amounts 
 Line 34: Standard or itemized deduction 
 You may take either the New York standard deduction or the New York itemized deduction. 
 To determine which deduction to use, follow these steps: 
 
 To find the standard deduction amount for your filing status, use the New York State  standard deduction table  below. 
 To calculate your New York itemized deduction, use  Form IT-196 ,  New York Resident, Nonresident, and Part-Year Resident Itemized Deductions , and its  instructions . 
 Compare the Form IT-196, line 49 amount to your New York standard deduction amount from the standard deduction table. 
 For a greater tax benefit, enter the  larger  of the Standard or Itemized deduction on line 34 and mark an   X   in the appropriate box,   Standard   or   Itemized  . 
 
  Notes:  
 
 If you choose the itemized deduction, you must submit Form IT-196 with your return. 
 If you are married and filing separate returns (filing status ③), both of you must take the standard deduction unless both of you choose to itemize deductions on your New York returns. 
 If you paid qualified college tuition expenses, you may choose to claim either a credit or an itemized deduction.* 
 
 *The college tuition itemized deduction may offer you a greater tax benefit if you itemize deductions on your New York return. Complete Form IT-196 to determine if your allowable New York itemized deduction, including the college tuition itemized deduction, is greater than your standard deduction. See  College tuition credit or itemized deduction  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  college ). 
  New York State standard deduction table 
 
 
 Filing status  
 Standard deduction  (enter on line 34)  
 
 
 ① Single and you marked item C  Yes  
 $3,100 
 
 
 ① Single and you marked item C  No  
 $8,000 
 
 
 ② Married filing joint return 
 $16,050 
 
 
 ③ Married filing separate return 
 $8,000 
 
 
 ④ Head of household (with qualifying person) 
 $11,200 
 
 
 ⑤ Qualifying surviving spouse  
 $16,050 
 
 
 
 Line 36: Dependent exemption amount 
 The value of each New York State  dependent  exemption is $1,000. 
 Multiply the  number  of your dependents listed on Form IT-201, item H (and on  Form IT-201 - item H continued , if you are claiming more than 7 dependents) by 1,000, and enter the amount on line 36. 
 Lines 37 and 38: Taxable income 
 Subtract line 36 from line 35. The result is your taxable income. Enter this amount on both line 37 and line 38. If line 36 is more than line 35, leave line 37 and line 38 blank. 
   Step 6: Calculate your taxes 
 Line 39 – New York State tax 
 Is line 33 (your New York adjusted gross income) $107,650 or less? 
 
 If   Yes  , find your New York State tax using the  2025 New York State Tax Table  (visit  www.tax.ny.gov  and search:  table ); or if line 38 is $65,000 or more, use the  New York State tax rate schedule  below. Enter the tax due on line 39. 
 If   No  , see  Tax computation – New York adjusted gross income of more than $107,650  below. 
 
   Line 40: New York State household credit 
 If you marked the  Yes  box at item C on the front of Form IT-201, you do not qualify for this credit. Continue with line 41. 
 If you marked   No  , use the appropriate table (1, 2, or 3) and the notes below to determine the amount to enter on line 40. 
 
  Filing status ①   only (Single):  Use  New York State household credit table 1 . 
  Filing status ② ,  ④ ,  and ⑤:  Use  New York State household credit table 2 . 
  Filing status ③   only (Married filing separate return):  Use  New York State household credit table 3 . 
 
  New York State household credit table 1—Filing status ① only (Single) 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 1  ) is over: 
 but not over 
 enter on Form IT-201, line 40: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $5,000 
 $75 
 
 
 5,000 
 6,000 
 60 
 
 
 6,000 
 7,000 
 50 
 
 
 7,000 
 20,000 
 45 
 
 
 20,000 
 25,000 
 40 
 
 
 25,000 
 28,000 
 20 
 
 
 28,000 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 40. 
 
 
 
   
  New York State household credit table 2—Filing status ②, ④, and ⑤ 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 1  ) is: 
 And the number of dependents listed on Form IT-201, item H, plus one for you (and one for your spouse  if  Married filing joint return ) is: 
 
 
 Over 
 but not over 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 over 7 (see  Note 3 ) 
 
 
 Enter on Form IT-201, line 40: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $5,000 
 $90 
 105 
 120 
 135 
 150 
 165 
 180 
 15 
 
 
 5,000 
 6,000 
 75 
 90 
 105 
 120 
 135 
 150 
 165 
 15 
 
 
 6,000 
 7,000 
 65 
 80 
 95 
 110 
 125 
 140 
 155 
 15 
 
 
 7,000 
 20,000 
 60 
 75 
 90 
 105 
 120 
 135 
 150 
 15 
 
 
 20,000 
 22,000 
 60 
 70 
 80 
 90 
 100 
 110 
 120 
 10 
 
 
 22,000 
 25,000 
 50 
 60 
 70 
 80 
 90 
 100 
 110 
 10 
 
 
 25,000 
 28,000 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 
 70 
 5 
 
 
 28,000 
 32,000 
 20 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 5 
 
 
 32,000 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 40 
 
 
 
   
  New York State household credit table 3 (see  Note 5 )—Filing status ③ only (Married filing separate return) 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 4  ) total from both returns is: 
 
 And the number of dependents (from both returns) listed on Form IT-201, item H (Form IT-203, item I),  plus one for you and one for your spouse is: 
 
 
 
 Over 
 but not over 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 over 7 (see   Note 3  ) 
 
 
 Enter on Form IT-201, line 40: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $5,000 
 $45 
 53 
 60 
 68 
 75 
 83 
 90 
 8 
 
 
 5,000 
 6,000 
 38 
 45 
 53 
 60 
 68 
 75 
 83 
 8 
 
 
 6,000 
 7,000 
 33 
 40 
 48 
 55 
 63 
 70 
 78 
 8 
 
 
 7,000 
 20,000 
 30 
 38 
 45 
 53 
 60 
 68 
 75 
 8 
 
 
 20,000 
 22,000 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 5 
 
 
 22,000 
 25,000 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 5 
 
 
 25,000 
 28,000 
 20 
 23 
 25 
 28 
 30 
 33 
 35 
 3 
 
 
 28,000 
 32,000 
 10 
 13 
 15 
 18 
 20 
 23 
 25 
 3 
 
 
 32,000 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 40 
 
 
 
  Use these notes for New York State household credit tables 1 through 3  
  Note 1  For most taxpayers, federal adjusted gross income is the amount from  Form IT-201, line 19 . However, if on Form IT-201 you entered special condition code   A6   (for Build America Bond interest), your federal adjusted gross income is the line 19 amount minus any Build America Bond interest that was included in the line 19 amount. 
  Note 2  This amount could be   0   or a negative amount. 
  Note 3  For each individual over 7, add the amount in this column to the column 7 amount. 
  Note 4  For most taxpayers, federal adjusted gross income is the amount from  Form IT-201, line 19  (or Form IT-203, line 19, Federal amount column). However, if on your New York State returns you or your spouse entered special condition code   A6   (for Build America Bond interest), federal adjusted gross income is the line 19 amount minus any Build America Bond interest that was included in the line 19 amount. If your spouse was not required to file a New York State return, use your spouse’s federal adjusted gross income as reported on their federal return (minus any Build America Bond interest included in that amount). 
  Note 5  The credit amounts have been rounded. 
 Line 41: Resident credit 
 Did you have income from sources outside New York State and pay income tax to another state, a local government of another state, the District of Columbia, or to a province of Canada? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 42. 
 If   Yes  , complete  Form IT-112-R ,  New York State Resident Credit , and, if applicable,  Form IT-112-C ,  New York State Resident Credit for Taxes Paid to a Province of Canada . Enter the total amount of resident credit on line 41 and submit either form or both forms with your return. 
 
 Line 42: Other New York State nonrefundable credits 
 If you are claiming any nonrefundable credits, complete the appropriate credit forms and  Form IT-201-ATT . Transfer the total amount of nonrefundable credits to line 42. 
  You must submit the completed credit forms and Form IT-201-ATT with your return.  
 Line 45: Net other New York State taxes 
 If you are subject to any other taxes, complete the appropriate forms and Part 2 of Form IT-201-ATT. Transfer the total amount from Form IT-201-ATT, line 30  Net   other New York State taxes,  to line 45. 
  You must submit the completed forms and Form IT-201-ATT with your return.  
 Line 47: New York City taxable income (NYC full-year residents only; part-year residents, see line 50) 
 Did you contribute to the New York Charitable Gifts Trust Fund in one or more of the following accounts: 
 
 Health Charitable Account; or 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Account;  and  
 
 did you claim an itemized deduction for that contribution on Form IT-196? 
 
 If   No  , enter the line 38 amount on line 47. 
 If   Yes  , complete the Line 47 worksheet below. 
 
    Line 47 worksheet 
 
 
 1. New York adjusted gross income (Form IT-201, line 33) 
 1. _________ 
 
 
 2. Amount of contributions to Charitable Gifts Trust Fund accounts  
 2.  _________  
 
 
 3. New York City adjusted gross income, add lines 1 and 2 
 3. _________ 
 
 
 4. Enter your itemized deduction amount (Form IT-201, line 34)  
 4.  _________  
 
 
 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3  
 5. _________ 
 
 
 6. Dependent exemptions (Form IT-201, line 36) 
 6.  _________  
 
 
 7.  New York City taxable income.  Subtract line 6 from line 5. Enter here and on Form IT-201, line 47 
 7. _________ 
 
 
 
 Line 47a: New York City resident tax (NYC full-year residents only; part-year residents, see line 50) 
 Is line 47 (your New York City taxable income) less than $65,000? 
 
 If   Yes  , find your New York City resident tax using the  2025 New York City Tax Table . Enter the tax on line 47a. 
 If   No  , find your New York City resident tax using the  New York City tax rate schedule  below. Enter the tax on line 47a. 
 
 Joint returns 
 If you are married and filing a joint New York State return and only one of you was a resident of New York City for all of 2025, do not enter an amount here. See the instructions for line 51. 
 Line 48: New York City household credit (NYC residents only) 
 If you marked the  Yes  box at item C on the front of Form IT-201, you do not qualify for this credit and should go to line 49. If you marked   No  , use the appropriate table (4, 5, or 6) and accompanying notes to determine the amount to enter on line 48. 
 Joint returns 
 If you are married and filing a joint New York State return and only one of you was a resident of New York City for all of 2025, do not enter an amount here. See the instructions for line 51. 
 
  Filing status ①   only (Single):  Use  New York City household credit table 4 . 
  Filing status ② ,  ④,   and ⑤:  Use  New York City household credit table 5 . 
  Filing status ③   only (Married filing separate return):  Use  New York City household credit table 6 . 
 
  New York City household credit table 4—Filing status  ①  only (Single) 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 1  ) is: 
 
 
 Over 
 but not over 
 enter on Form IT-201, line 48: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $10,000 
 $15 
 
 
 10,000 
 12,500 
 10 
 
 
 12,500 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 48. 
 
 
 
   
  New York City household credit table 5—Filing status ②, ④, and ⑤ 
 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 1   )  is: 
 
 
  And the number of dependents listed on Form IT-201, item H, plus one for you  (and one for your spouse if  Married filing joint return)  is:  
 
 
 
 Over 
 but not over 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 over 7 (see  Note 3 ) 
 
 
 Enter on Form IT-201, line 48: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $15,000 
 $30 
 60 
 90 
 120 
 150 
 180 
 210 
 30 
 
 
 15,000 
 17,500 
 25 
 50 
 75 
 100 
 125 
 150 
 175 
 25 
 
 
 17,500 
 20,000 
 15 
 30 
 45 
 60 
 75 
 90 
 105 
 15 
 
 
 20,000 
 22,500 
 10 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 50 
 60 
 70 
 10 
 
 
 22,500 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 48. 
 
 
 
   
  New York City household credit table 6 (see  Note 5 )—Filing status ③ only (Married filing separate return) 
 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (see   Note 4   )   total from both returns is: 
 
 
  And the number of dependents (from both returns) listed on Form IT-201,  item H (Form IT-203, item I) plus one for you and one for your spouse is:  
 
 
 
 Over 
 but not over 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 over 7 (see   Note 3  ) 
 
 
 Enter on Form IT-201, line 48: 
 
 
 $ (see   Note 2  ) 
 $15,000 
 $15 
 30 
 45 
 60 
 75 
 90 
 105 
 15 
 
 
 15,000 
 17,500 
 13 
 25 
 38 
 50 
 63 
 75 
 88 
 13 
 
 
 17,500 
 20,000 
 8 
 15 
 23 
 30 
 38 
 45 
 53 
 8 
 
 
 20,000 
 22,500 
 5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 5 
 
 
 22,500 
 No credit is allowed; do not make an entry on Form IT-201, line 48 
 
 
 
  Use these notes for New York City household credit tables 4 through 6  
  Note 1  For most taxpayers, federal adjusted gross income is the amount from  Form IT-201, line 19 . However, if on Form IT-201 you entered special condition code   A6   (for Build America Bond interest), your federal adjusted gross income is the line 19 amount minus any Build America Bond interest that was included in the line 19 amount. 
  Note 2  This amount could be   0   or a negative amount. 
  Note 3  For each individual over 7, add the amount in this column to the column 7 amount. 
  Note 4  For most taxpayers, federal adjusted gross income is the amount from  Form IT-201, line 19  (or Form IT-203, line 19,  Federal amount  column). However, if on your New York State returns you or your spouse entered special condition code   A6   (for Build America Bond interest), federal adjusted gross income is the line 19 amount minus any Build America Bond interest that was included in the line 19 amount. If your spouse was not required to file a New York State return, use your spouse’s federal adjusted gross income as reported on their federal return (minus any Build America Bond interest included in that amount). 
  Note 5  The credit amounts have been rounded. 
 Line 50: Part-year New York City resident tax 
 If you were a New York City resident for only part of 2025, complete  Form IT-360.1 ,  Change of City Resident Status . Enter the tax amount on line 50 and submit Form IT-360.1 with your return. For more information see  Form IT-360.1-I ,  Instructions for Form IT-360.1 . 
   Line 51: Other New York City taxes 
 Enter the total amount of other New York City taxes from Form IT-201-ATT, Part 3, line 34. 
 Joint returns 
 If you are married and filing a joint New York State return and only one of you was a resident of New York City for all of 2025, calculate on a separate sheet the New York City resident tax on the New York State taxable income of the city resident as if you had filed separate federal returns reduced by the New York City household credit (if applicable). 
 The spouse that was a part-year New York City resident in 2025 should: 
 
 Calculate their part-year New York City resident tax on Form IT-360.1. 
 Transfer the combined tax amounts of both spouses from your separate sheet and your spouse’s Form IT-360.1 to line 51. 
 Write the name and Social Security number of the New York City resident and   Taxable income of New York City resident   on that sheet. 
 Submit it with your return. 
 
 If one spouse was a resident of New York City and the other a nonresident for all of 2025, calculate on a separate sheet the New York City resident tax on the New York State taxable income of the city resident as if you had filed separate federal returns reduced by the New York City household credit (if applicable). Transfer the amount from your separate sheet to line 51. Write the name and Social Security number of the city resident and   Taxable income of New York City resident   on that sheet. Submit it with your return. 
 If you are self-employed and carry on a trade, business, or profession in New York City, you may also be required to file New York City’s Form NYC-202,  Unincorporated Business Tax Return for Individuals and Single-Member LLCs,  or Form NYC-202S,  Unincorporated Business Tax Return for Individuals.  Since New York State does not administer the New York City unincorporated business tax, do  not  file your Form NYC-202 or NYC-202S with your state return. 
 Line 53: New York City nonrefundable credits 
 Can you claim the New York City unincorporated business tax (UBT) credit, the New York City accumulation distribution credit, or the part-year resident nonrefundable New York City child and dependent care credit? See  New York City credits  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  credits ). 
 
 If   No  , go to line 54. 
 If   Yes  , complete  Section C  of Form IT-201-ATT and enter the amount from Form IT-201-ATT, line 10, on line 53. 
 
 Lines 54a through 54e: Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax (MCTMT) 
  The metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax (MCTMT)  is imposed on  self-employed individuals  with net earnings from self-employment allocated to Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District (MCTD).  
 For purposes of the MCTMT, the MCTD is divided into two zones. 
 
  Zone 1 includes the counties of: 
 
 Bronx 
 Kings (Brooklyn) 
 New York (Manhattan) 
 Queens 
 Richmond (Staten Island) 
 
 
 Zone 2 includes the counties of:
 
 Dutchess 
 Nassau 
 Orange 
 Putnam 
 Rockland 
 Suffolk 
 Westchester 
 
 
 
 If an individual’s net earnings from self-employment allocated to  either  zone  exceed $50,000  for the tax year, then you are subject to the MCTMT. The $50,000 threshold is calculated on an individual basis, even if you file a joint income tax return. 
 For purposes of the MCTMT,   self-employed individuals include: 
 
 Sole proprietors 
 Partners in partnerships 
 Members of limited liability companies (LLCs) that are treated as partnerships 
 Partners of limited liability partnerships (LLPs) that are treated as partnerships 
 
  Note:  Partners and members will be collectively referred to as partners. Partnerships, including LLPs and LLCs treated as partnerships, will be collectively referred to as partnerships in these instructions. 
 Did you or your spouse have net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 1  or  Zone 2, or both that exceed $50,000? 
 
 If   No  , skip lines 54a through 54e, and go to line 55. 
 If   Yes  , you are subject to MCTMT. Go to lines 54a and 54b, as applicable. 
 
    Lines 54a and 54b:  MCTMT net earnings base (see the detailed explanation below) for: 
 
  Zone 1 - Enter the amount of net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 1 for the tax year on  line 54a . 
  Zone 2 - Enter the amount of net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 2 for the tax year on  line 54b . 
 
  Notes:   
 
  Only  enter an amount on line 54a if your net earnings from self-employment allocated to  Zone 1 exceed $50,000  for the tax year (calculated on an individual basis, even if you file a joint income tax return). 
  Only  enter an amount on line 54b if your net earnings from self-employment allocated to  Zone 2 exceed $50,000  for the tax year (calculated on an individual basis, even if you file a joint income tax return). 
  However , if you are an owner of an approved business or a partner in an approved business in the  START-UP NY program , see  START-UP NY  below. 
 
 You must calculate your MCTMT net earnings base separately for each source of self-employment income that has business activity in one or both zones. If you have more than one source, combine all the individual amounts on line 54a (Zone 1 amounts) or line 54b (Zone 2 amounts), as applicable. 
 To calculate your MCTMT net earnings base you must multiply your  net earnings from self-employment  from each source by the specific zone’s allocation percentage for each source (see  Determining the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District allocation percentage  below). 
 Joint returns 
 If you are filing a joint return, you and your spouse must each calculate the $50,000 Zone 1 threshold and the $50,000 Zone 2 threshold on an individual basis: 
 
  For the MCTMT net earnings base for Zone 1 reported on line 54a: 
 
 If each spouse’s individually calculated MCTMT net earnings base in Zone 1 is more than $50,000, add the two amounts and enter the combined total on line 54a. 
 If either spouse’s individually calculated MCTMT net earnings base in Zone 1 is $50,000 or less, do not include that spouse’s base on line 54a. 
 
 
 For the MCTMT net earnings base for Zone 2 reported on line 54b:
 
 If each spouse’s individually calculated MCTMT net earnings base in Zone 2 is more than $50,000, add the two amounts and enter the combined total on line 54b. 
 If either spouse’s individually calculated MCTMT net earnings base in Zone 2 is $50,000 or less, do not include that spouse’s base on line 54b. 
 
 
 
  Example :  You are filing a joint return. You have net earnings from self-employment totaling $120,000 in the MCTD, of which, $75,000 is allocated to Zone 1, and $45,000 is allocated to Zone 2. Your spouse also has net earnings from self-employment totaling $105,000, of which, $51,000 is allocated to Zone 1, and $54,000 is allocated to Zone 2.  
  Since each spouse’s individually calculated net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 1 exceed the $50,000 threshold, you must add the two amounts together ($75,000 + $51,000) and enter the total of $126,000 on line 54a.   
  Since your net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 2 is less than the $50,000 threshold, do not include your net earnings in the total on line 54b. However, you must enter your spouse’s net earnings from self-employment allocated to Zone 2 of $54,000 on line 54b.  
 MCTD allocation percentage 
   Determining the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District allocation percentage for each source of self-employment income: 
 
    START-UP NY  approved business owners or partners of an approved business who have net earnings from self-employment allocated to either zone of the MCTD, must complete  Form IT-6-SNY ,  Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax (MCTMT) for START-UP NY . If you have other sources of self-employment income allocated to either zone of the MCTD (other than the START-UP NY income), calculate those amounts as shown below. You must include all your net earnings from self-employment allocated to:
 
 Zone 1 on Form IT-6-SNY, line 1. 
 Zone 2 on Form IT-6-SNY, line 6. 
 
 
 
  Note:  You must enter the amounts from Form IT-6-SNY, line 5 or 10 on Form IT-201, line 54a or 54b, as applicable. It is possible that the amounts on Form IT-201, line 54a or 54b may be $50,000 or less. 
  Example:   You have total net earnings from self-employment within Zone 1 of $80,000. Since this amount exceeds the $50,000 threshold, you are subject to the MCTMT. However, because $45,000 is from the tax-free NY area within Zone 1, you will be able to exclude $45,000 from the net earnings base on which you will calculate the MCTMT. Therefore, your net earnings used to calculate the MCTMT is $35,000. You calculated the MCTMT net earnings base as follows:  
 
 
 
 Net earnings subject to  MCTMT in Zone 1 reported on Form IT-6-SNY, line 1  
   = $80,000  
 
 
  START-UP NY net earnings in the tax-free area in Zone 1 reported on Form IT-6-SNY, line 4  
   = $45,000  
 
 
 MCTMT net earnings base for Zone 1  reported on Form IT-6-SNY, line 5 and Form IT-201, line 54a  
   = $35,000  
 
 
 
 
  Partners  must allocate partnership income to each zone of the MCTD based on the partnership's allocation. Partners will receive their Zone 1 or Zone 2 (or both) allocation percentage from their partnership on Form IT-204-IP,  New York Partner's Schedule K-1 .
 
  Zone 1-  Multiply your net partnership income by the Zone 1 allocation percentage from Form IT-204-IP, line 29b, to determine the amount to include on line 54a. 
  Zone 2-  Multiply your net partnership income by the Zone 2 allocation percentage from Form IT-204-IP, line 29c, to determine the amount to include on line 54b. 
 
 
 
 If you are a partner in more than one partnership, calculate the amount separately for each partnership. 
  Example:   You are a partner in a partnership XYZ doing business in Zone 1. You also report net earnings from self-employment from two businesses that report their activity on federal Schedule C (Form 1040). Business A carries on business both in and out of Zone 1. Business B carries on business only inside Zone 1. You calculate the amount to enter on Line 54a as follows:  
 
 
 
 1.  Net partnership income of $80,000 multiplied by 65% (0.65), the Zone 1 allocation percentage shown on Form IT-204-IP, line 29b  
  = $52,000  
 
 
 2.  Business B's net earnings from self-employment of $36,000  
  = $36,000  
 
 
 3. Business A's net earnings from self-employment of $30,000. Since the business is carried on both in and out of Zone 1, use Form IT-203-A to calculate the amount to include: Net earnings of $30,000 × 40% (Form IT-203-A, line 8) 
  =  $12,000   
 
 
 4 . Total amount to be included on line 54a  
  = $100,000  
 
 
 
 
  All others:  
 
  Zone 1  –
 
 If all your net earnings from self-employment are from business activity  carried on inside Zone 1 , then all your net earnings from self-employment are allocated to Zone 1. Include the total net earnings from self-employment for that source on  line 54a . 
 If your net earnings from self-employment are from business activity  both  inside and outside Zone 1, you must complete Form IT-203-A, Business Allocation Schedule, to calculate the amount to include on  line 54a . 
 
 
  Zone 2  –
 
 If all your net earnings from self-employment are from business activity  carried on inside Zone 2 , then all your net earnings from self-employment are allocated to Zone 2. Include the total net earnings from self-employment for that source on  line 54b . 
 If your net earnings from self-employment are from business activity  both  inside and outside Zone 2, you must complete  Form IT-203-A ,  Business Allocation Schedule,  to calculate the amount to include on  line 54b . 
 
 
 
 
 
  Note:  For the definition of  business activity  inside and outside either zone of the MCTD, see  Form IT-203-A-I ,  Instructions for Form IT-203-A . 
    Net earnings from self-employment  generally is the amount reported on federal Schedule SE (Form 1040), Part 1, line 6, derived from the source of self-employment income. 
 Under IRC § 1402, income from certain employment is treated as income from a trade or business, and is reported on federal Schedule SE (Form 1040) as net earnings from self-employment. Accordingly, the income is included in an individual's calculation of net earnings from self-employment allocated to the MCTD and is subject to the MCTMT. 
 Types of employment treated as a trade or business under IRC § 1402 include but are not limited to: 
 
 services performed by a United States citizen employed by a foreign government, the United Nations, or other international organization; 
 services performed by a church employee if the church or other qualified church-controlled organization has a certificate in effect electing an exemption from employer Social Security and Medicare taxes; and 
 qualified services performed by a minister, a member of a religious order who has not taken a vow of poverty, or a Christian Science practitioner or reader. 
 
 If your net earnings from self-employment are not subject to federal self-employment tax (for example, nonresident noncitizens), use federal Schedule SE (Form 1040) to calculate your net earnings from self-employment as if they were subject to the tax. 
  Note:  In determining if the exclusion under IRC § 1402(a)(13) applies, an individual shall not be considered a limited partner if they directly, or indirectly, take part in the control, or participate in the management or operations of the partnership such that they are not a passive investor, regardless of their title or characterization in a partnership or operating agreement. In this case, you must include the distributive share from such partnership in your net earnings from self-employment [Tax Law § 800(e)]. 
  Line 54c: MCTMT for Zone 1  
 Multiply the amount on line 54a by 0.60% (0.0060). 
  Line 54d: MCTMT for Zone 2  
 Multiply the amount on line 54b by 0.34% (0.0034). 
  Example:     You have net earnings from self-employment totaling $110,000 in the MCTD with $40,000 allocated to Zone 1, and $70,000 allocated to Zone 2. The amount allocated to Zone 1, $40,000, is exempt from the MCTMT since it is less than the $50,000 threshold. However, the amount allocated to Zone 2, $70,000, exceeds the $50,000 threshold. Therefore, you calculate your MCTMT as follows:   
 
 
 
  $70,000 (amount allocated to Zone 2) x 0.0034 (Zone 2 rate) = $238 (amount entered on line 54d)  
 
 
 
  Example:   You have net earnings from self-employment totaling $110,000 in the MCTD with $53,000 allocated to Zone 1, and $57,000 allocated to Zone 2. The net earnings allocated to both zones exceed the $50,000 threshold. Therefore, you calculate your MCTMT as follows:   
 
 
 
  $53,000 (amount allocated to Zone 1) x 0.0060 (Zone 1 rate) = $318 (amount entered on line 54c)  
  $57,000 (amount allocated to Zone 2) x 0.0034 (Zone 2 rate) = $194 (amount entered on line 54d)  
  $318 + $194 = $512 (amount entered on line 54e)  
 
 
 
   Line 55: Yonkers resident income tax surcharge 
 If you were a resident of Yonkers, did you enter an amount that is more than   0   on line 46? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 56. 
 If   Yes  , complete the  Yonkers worksheet  below and enter the amount from line o on line 55. 
 
    Yonkers worksheet 
 
 
 a. Amount from line 46 
 a. _________ 
 
 
 b. Amount from Form IT-213,  Claim for Empire State Child Credit, line  9 
 b. _________ 
 
 
 c. Amount from Form IT-214,  Claim for Real Property Tax Credit,  line 20 
 c. _________ 
 
 
 d. Amount from Form IT-216,  Claim for Child and Dependent Care Credit,  line 14 (New York filing status ③ taxpayers, see instructions for Form IT-216) 
 d. _________ 
 
 
 e. Amount from Form IT-215,  Claim for Earned Income Credit,  line 16 (New York filing status ③ taxpayers transfer the amount from Form IT-215, line 17) 
 e. _________ 
 
 
 f. Amount from Form IT-209,  Claim for Noncustodial Parent New York State Earned Income Credit,  line 32 or, if an amount is entered on line 42, the larger of line 32 or line 42 
 f. _________ 
 
 
 g. If you elected to claim the college tuition credit, the amount from Form IT-272,  Claim for College Tuition Credit or Itemized   Deduction,  line 5 or 7, whichever applies 
 g. _________ 
 
 
 h. Total from lines 69 and 69a from Form IT-201 
 h. _________ 
 
 
 i. Amount from Form IT-201-ATT,  Other Tax Credits and Taxes,  line 13 
 i.  _________  
 
 
 j. Add lines b through i 
 j. _________ 
 
 
 k. STAR reconciliation amount (Form IT-119, line 3) 
 k.  _________  
 
 
 l. Subtract line k from line j 
 l.  __________  
 
 
 m. Subtract line l from line a 
 m. _________ 
 
 
 n. Yonkers resident tax rate (16.75%) 
 n.  __ 0.1675 ___  
 
 
 o. Multiply line m by line n. Enter this amount on Form IT-201, line 55 
 o. _________ 
 
 
 
 If you are filing jointly (filing status ②) and only one spouse was a Yonkers resident and the other spouse was a Yonkers nonresident for all of 2025: 
 
 Enter special condition code   Y1   on Form IT-201, Item G. 
 Calculate on a separate sheet the Yonkers resident income tax surcharge on the New York State tax of the Yonkers resident as if you had filed separate federal returns. 
 Enter the amount calculated on line 55. 
 Write the name and Social Security number of the Yonkers resident and   Yonkers resident income tax surcharge   on that sheet. 
 Submit that sheet with your return. 
 
   Line 56: Yonkers nonresident earnings tax 
 If you were not a resident of Yonkers, did you earn wages there? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 57. 
 If   Yes  , complete  Form Y-203 ,  Yonkers Nonresident Earnings Tax Return . Enter the amount of tax on line 56 and submit Form Y-203 with your return. 
 
   Line 57: Part-year Yonkers resident income tax surcharge 
 If you were a resident of Yonkers for only part of 2025, complete  Form IT-360.1 ,  Change of City Resident Status . Enter the tax amount on line 57 and submit Form IT-360.1 with your return. 
 Line 59: Sales or use tax 
 Report your sales or use tax liability on this line. 
 You owe sales or compensating use tax if you: 
 
 purchased an item or service subject to tax that is delivered to you in New York State without payment of New York State and local tax to the seller; or 
 purchased an item or service outside New York State that is subject to tax in New York State (and you were a resident of New York State at the time of purchase) with subsequent use in New York State. 
 
  Note:  You may be entitled to a credit for sales tax paid to another state. See the exact calculation method in the  instructions  for Form ST-141,  Individual Purchaser’s Periodic Report of Sales and Use Tax . 
 For sales and use tax purposes, a resident includes persons who have a permanent place of abode in the state. Accordingly, you may be a resident for sales tax purposes even though you may not be a resident for income tax purposes. For more information, see the  instructions  for Form ST-141. 
 You  may not  use this line to report: 
 
 any sales and use tax on business purchases if the business is registered for sales and use tax purposes. You must report this tax on the business’s sales tax return. 
 any unpaid sales and use tax on motor vehicles, trailers, all-terrain vehicles, vessels, or snowmobiles. This tax is paid directly to the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). If you will not be registering or titling it at the DMV, you should remit the tax directly to the Tax Department using  Form ST-130 ,  Business Purchaser’s Report of Sales and Use Tax , or  Form ST-141 . 
 
 An unpaid sales or use tax liability commonly occurs if you made purchases through the Internet, by catalog, from television shopping channels, or on an Indian reservation (except for purchases subject to Oneida Nation taxes), or if you purchased items or services subject to tax in another state and brought them back to New York for use here. 
  Example 1:   You purchased a computer over the Internet that was delivered to your house in Monroe County, New York, from an out-of-state company and did not pay sales tax to that company.  
  Example 2:   You purchased a book on a trip to New Hampshire that you brought back to your residence in Nassau County, New York, for use there . 
 You may also owe an additional  local  tax if you use property or services in another locality in New York State, other than the locality to which you paid tax. You owe use tax to the second locality if you were a resident of that locality at the time of the purchase, and its rate of tax is higher than the rate of tax originally paid. 
 Failure to pay sales or use tax may result in the imposition of penalty and interest. The Tax Department conducts routine audits based on information received from third parties, including the U.S. Customs Service and other states. 
  Sales and use tax chart 
 
 
 If your federal adjusted gross income (line 19) is: 
 Enter on line 59: 
 
 
 up to $15,000* 
 $3 
 
 
 $15,001 - $30,000 
 6 
 
 
 30,001 - 50,000 
 10 
 
 
 50,001 - 75,000 
 15 
 
 
 75,001 - 100,000 
 18 
 
 
 100,001 - 150,000 
 26 
 
 
 150,001 - 200,000 
 34 
 
 
 200,001 and greater 
 0.0175% (0.000175) of income, or $125, whichever is smaller 
 
 
 
 *This may be any amount up to $15,000, including   0   or a negative amount. 
  You may use this chart for purchases of items or services costing less than $1,000 each (excluding shipping and handling).  
  You may not use this chart for purchases related to a business, rental real estate, or royalty activities, regardless of the amount.  
 If you maintained a permanent place of abode in New York State for sales and use tax purposes for only part of the year, multiply the tax amount from the chart by the number of months you maintained the permanent place of abode in New York State and divide the result by 12. (Count any period you maintained the abode for more than one-half of a month as one month.) 
  If you owe sales or use tax , you may report the amount you owe on your personal income tax return rather than filing Form ST-141. 
 Using the sales and use tax chart above is an easy way to calculate your liability for all your purchases of items or services costing less than $1,000 each (excluding shipping and handling) that are not related to a business, rental real estate, or royalty activities. 
 You must use  Form ST-141  to calculate your sales and use tax liability to be reported on this return if any of the following apply: 
 
 You prefer to calculate the exact amount of sales and use tax due. 
 You owe sales or use tax on an item or service costing $1,000 or more (excluding shipping and handling). 
 You owe sales or use tax for purchases related to a business not registered for sales tax purposes, rental real estate, or royalty activities. 
 
 Include the amount from Form ST-141, line 7, on Form IT-201, line 59.  Do not submit Form ST-141 with your return.  
 If the amount reported on line 59 is $1,700 or more, you must complete  Form IT-135 ,  Sales and Use Tax Report for Purchases of Items and Services Costing $25,000 or More , and submit it with your return. 
  If you do not owe any sales or use tax, you must enter  0  on line 59.  Do  not  leave line 59 blank. 
  For additional information on when you may owe sales or use tax to New York, see Tax Bulletin,  Use Tax for Individuals (including Estates and Trusts)   ( TB-ST-913 )  .   For more information on taxable and exempt goods and services, see Tax Bulletin,  Quick Reference Guide for Taxable and Exempt Property and Services  ( TB-ST-740 ) .  
   Step 7: Add voluntary contributions 
 Line 60 
 Do you want to make any voluntary contributions to the funds listed on  Form IT-227 ? 
 
 If   No  , go to line 61. 
 If   Yes  , complete Form IT-227 and enter the amount from Part 2, line 1. Submit Form IT-227 with your return. 
 
 For a detailed description of the funds, see  Voluntary contributions  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  IT-227 ). 
  Your total contributions will reduce your refund or increase your tax payment. You cannot change the amounts you give after you file your return, even if we later adjust your refund or amount owed.  
   Step 8: Enter your payments and credits 
 Line 63: Empire State child credit 
 Do you have at least one  qualifying child ? 
 (A  qualifying child  must be less than 17 years old on December 31 st  of the tax year.) 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify for this credit. Continue with line 64. 
 If   Yes  , review the instructions for Form IT-213,  Claim for Empire State Child Credit , to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete Form IT-213, and transfer the amount from  Form IT-213  to Form IT-201, line 63. Submit Form IT-213 with your return. 
 
 For more information, see the  instructions for Form IT-213 . 
 Line 64: New York State and New York City child and dependent care credits 
 Would you qualify to claim the  federal  child and dependent care credit for 2025 (whether or not you actually claimed it)? 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify for this credit. Continue with line 65. 
 If   Yes  , complete  Form IT-216 ,  Claim for Child and Dependent Care Credit , to determine your New York State child and dependent care credit. 
 
 If you are a  New York City  resident and your federal adjusted gross income* is  $30,000 or less , and you have a qualifying child  under four years of age  as of December 31, 2025, review the instructions for Form IT-216 to see if you qualify to claim the New York City child and dependent care credit. 
 *For most taxpayers,  federal adjusted gross income  is the amount from Form IT-201, line 19. However, if on Form IT-201 you entered special condition code  A6  (Build America Bond interest), your federal adjusted gross income is the line 19 amount minus any Build America Bond interest that was included in the line 19 amount. 
 Transfer the amount from Form IT-216 to Form IT-201, line 64. Submit Form IT-216 with your return. 
 For more information, see the  instructions for Form IT-216 . 
 Line 65: New York State earned income credit (New York State EIC) 
 Did you claim the  federal  earned income credit for 2025 on your federal income tax return, or could you have claimed it based on your federal adjusted gross income? 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify for this credit. Continue with line 66. 
 If   Yes  , review the  instructions for Form IT-215 ,  Claim for Earned Income Credit,  to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete Form IT-215 and transfer the amount from  Form IT-215  to Form IT-201, line 65. Submit Form IT-215 with your return. 
 
 If you are a noncustodial parent and have paid child support through a support collection unit, you may be eligible for the noncustodial parent New York State earned income credit (noncustodial EIC). However, you cannot claim both the New York State EIC and the noncustodial EIC. Review the  instructions for Form IT-209 ,  Claim for Noncustodial Parent New York State Earned Income Credit,  to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete  Form IT-209  to determine which credit offers the better tax benefit. If you are claiming the New York State EIC, transfer the New York State EIC from Form IT-209 to Form IT-201, line 65, and submit Form IT-209 with your return (do not submit Form IT-215). If you are claiming the noncustodial EIC, see line 66 instructions below. 
 If the IRS is calculating your federal earned income tax credit, write   EIC   in the box to the left of the money column, and leave the money column blank on line 65. You must complete Form IT-201, lines 67 through 75, but do not complete lines 76 through 80. 
 Complete Form IT-215, lines 1 through 9, and submit it with your return. The Tax Department will calculate your New York State earned income credit and the resulting refund or amount due. 
 If you are due a refund, we will send you the refund along with an explanatory statement. If you owe tax, you will receive a bill that must be paid within 21 days, or by April 15, 2026, whichever is later. 
 Line 66: Noncustodial parent New York State earned income credit (EIC) 
 Did you make child support payments payable through a New York State Support Collection Unit? 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify for this credit. Go to line 67. 
 If   Yes  , review the  instructions for Form IT-209  to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete  Form IT-209  and transfer the credit amount to the appropriate line of Form IT-201. Submit Form IT-209 with your return. 
 
 Line 67: Real property tax credit 
 Review the  instructions for Form IT-214 ,  Claim for Real Property Tax Credit for Homeowners and Renters , to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete  Form IT-214  and transfer the amount from Form IT-214 to Form IT-201, line 67. Submit Form IT-214 with your return. 
 Line 68: College tuition credit 
 Did you or your spouse or any dependents pay college tuition expenses during 2025? 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify for this credit. Go to line 69. 
 If   Yes  , and you  did not  claim the college tuition itemized deduction on Form IT-196, complete  Form IT-272 ,  Claim for College Tuition Credit or Itemized Deduction,  and transfer the amount from Form IT-272 to Form IT-201, line 68. Submit Form IT-272 with your return. 
 
 For more information, see the  instructions for Form IT-272 . 
 Line 69: New York City school tax credit (fixed amount) (NYC residents only) 
 If you are  not  a New York City resident or part-year resident, you do not qualify to claim this credit. Go to line 70. 
 If you are a New York City resident or part-year resident and marked the  Yes  box at item C on the front of Form IT-201 indicating that you can be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s federal return,  or  your income (see below) is more than $250,000, you do not qualify for this credit. Go to line 69a. 
 If you are a New York City resident or part-year resident and marked the  No  box at item C on the front of Form IT-201 indicating that you  cannot  be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s federal return and you are filing status ①, ③, ④, or ⑤ (and your income [see below] is $250,000 or less), determine your credit using Table 1 below if you were a full-year resident or Table 2 below if you were a part-year city resident. 
 Special rules for married filing joint return (filing status ②) 
 
 If both spouses are full-year city residents, determine your credit using Table 1, filing status ②. 
 If both spouses are part-year city residents, determine your credit using Table 2, filing status ②. If you have different periods of city residence, determine your credit using the number of months for the spouse with the longer city resident period.   Example:   You and your spouse are filing a joint New York State return (filing status  ② ). You were a 5-month New York City resident, and your spouse was an 8-month New York City resident. Your income was less than $250,000, and you marked filing status  ② , married filing joint return. You are entitled to a credit of $83 (using the 8-month period from Table 2).    
 If one spouse is a full-year city resident and one spouse is a full-year city nonresident,  and you are calculating your NYC tax as married filing separately,  determine your credit for the full-year city resident spouse using Table 1, filing status ③. The full-year city nonresident spouse may not claim the credit. 
 If one spouse is a full-year city resident and one spouse is a full-year city nonresident, and you  elect to calculate your NYC tax as if both were full-year city residents,  determine your credit using Table 1, filing status ②. 
 If one spouse is a full-year city resident and one spouse is a part-year city resident, you must calculate each credit separately and add them together. Determine the full-year city resident spouse’s credit using Table 1, filing status ③, and determine the part-year city resident spouse’s credit using Table 2, filing status ③.   Example:   You and your spouse are filing a joint New York State income tax return (filing status  ② ). You were a full-year New York City resident. Your spouse was a New York City resident for only 3 months during the year, and your income was less than $250,000. Add your credit amount from Table 1, filing status  ③  ($63), and your spouse’s credit amount from Table 2, filing status  ③  ($16), for a combined credit of $79.    
 If one spouse was a part-year city resident and the other spouse was a full-year city nonresident, determine your credit for the part-year city resident spouse using Table 2, filing status ③. The full-year city nonresident spouse may not take a credit. 
 
  Table 1 - Full-year New York City residents: New York City school tax credit table 
 
 
 Filing status: 
 If your income (see below) is: 
 Your credit* is: 
 
 
 
 
 Single, filing status ①, or 
 Married filing separate return, filing status ③, or 
 Head of household, filing status ④ 
 
 
 $250,000 or less 
  $63  
 
 
 
 
 Married filing joint return, filing status ② 
 Qualifying surviving spouse, filing status ⑤ 
 
 
 $250,000 or less 
  $125  
 
 
 
 *The statutory credit amounts have been rounded. 
  Table 2 - Part-year New York City residents: New York City school tax credit proration chart 
 
 
 Resident period  (number of months) 
 
 If your income (see below) is $250,000 or less, and 
 
 
 
 Your filing status is ①, ③ or ④, your credit* is: 
 Your filing status is ② or ⑤, your credit* is: 
 
 
 1 
 $5 
 $10 
 
 
 2 
 10 
 21 
 
 
 3 
 16 
 31 
 
 
 4 
 21 
 42 
 
 
 5 
 26 
 52 
 
 
 6 
 31 
 63 
 
 
 7 
 36 
 73 
 
 
 8 
 42 
 83 
 
 
 9 
 47 
 94 
 
 
 10 
 52 
 104 
 
 
 11 
 57 
 115 
 
 
 12 
 63 
 125 
 
 
 
 *The statutory credit amounts have been rounded. 
   Income   ,  for purposes of determining your New York City school tax credit, means your federal adjusted gross income from Form IT-201, line 19, minus distributions from an individual retirement account and an individual retirement annuity, from Form IT-201, line 9, if they were included in your federal adjusted gross income. 
 Line 69a: New York City school tax credit (rate reduction amount) (New York City residents only) 
 If you are  not  a New York City resident or part-year resident, you do not qualify to claim this credit. Go to line 70. 
 If you are a New York City resident or part-year resident and you marked   Yes   at item C on the front of Form IT-201 indicating that you can be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer’s federal return, or your income (see below) is more than $500,000, you do not qualify to claim this credit. Go to line 70. 
 If you are a New York City resident or part-year resident and marked   No   at item C on the front of Form IT-201, use your New York City taxable income (see below) to calculate your credit. 
 Joint returns 
 You must calculate and use the  combined  New York City taxable income of both spouses: 
 
 If both spouses were city residents for all of 2025, use the amount from Form IT-201, line 47. 
 If both spouses were part-year city residents in 2025, use the amount from Form IT-360.1, line 47. (If each spouse was required to complete a separate Form IT-360.1, combine the line 47 amounts from both forms.) 
 If only one spouse was a city resident for all of 2025, use a separate sheet to calculate the New York City taxable income of the full-year city resident spouse as if they had filed a separate federal return. If the other spouse was a part-year city resident in 2025, add the amount of their New York City taxable income (from Form IT-360.1, line 47) to the result. 
 
 All others: 
 
 If you were a city resident for all of 2025, use the amount from Form IT-201, line 47. 
 If you were a part-year city resident in 2025, use the amount from Form IT-360.1, line 47. 
 
  Calculation of NYC school tax credit (rate reduction amount) for married filing jointly ② and qualifying surviving spouse ⑤ 
 
 
 If city taxable income is: 
 
 The credit is: 
 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $21,600 
 0.171% of taxable income 
 
 
 21,600 
 500,000 
 $37 plus 0.228% of the excess over $21,600 
 
 
 
   
  Calculation of NYC school tax credit (rate reduction amount) for single ① and married filing separately ③ 
 
 
 If city taxable income is: 
 
 The credit is: 
 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $12,000 
 0.171% of taxable income 
 
 
 12,000 
 500,000 
 $21 plus 0.228% of the excess over $12,000 
 
 
 
   
  Calculation of NYC school tax credit (rate reduction amount) for head of household ④ 
 
 
 If city taxable income is: 
 
 The credit is: 
 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $14,400 
 0.171% of taxable income 
 
 
 14,400 
 500,000 
 $25 plus 0.228% of the excess over $14,400 
 
 
 
 Line 70: New York City earned income credit (New York City residents only) 
 Did you claim the  federal  earned income credit for 2025 on your federal return, or could you have claimed it based on your federal adjusted gross income? 
 
 If   No  , you do not qualify to claim this credit. Go to line 71. 
 If   Yes  , review the instructions for Form IT-215,  Claim for Earned Income Credit , or Form IT-209,  Claim for Noncustodial Parent New York State Earned Income Credit,  to see if you qualify for  either  credit.   If you qualify, complete  either  Form IT-215 or Form IT-209, and transfer the amount from  either  Form IT-215 or Form IT-209 to Form IT-201, line 70. Submit Form IT-215  or  Form IT-209 with your return. 
 
 For more information, see the  instructions for Form IT-215  or the  instructions for Form IT-209 . 
 Is the IRS calculating your federal earned income tax credit? 
 If the IRS is calculating your federal earned income tax credit, write   EIC   in the box to the left of the money column, and leave the money column blank on line 70. You must complete Form IT-201, lines 71 through 75, but do not complete lines 76 through 80. The Tax Department will calculate your New York City earned income credit and the resulting refund or amount due. 
 If you are due a refund, we will send you the refund along with an explanatory statement. If you owe tax, you will receive a bill that must be paid within 21 days, or by April 15, 2026, whichever is later. 
 Line 70a: New York City income tax elimination credit 
 Review the instructions for Form IT-270,  New York City Income Tax Elimination Credit , to see if you qualify for this credit. If you qualify, complete Form IT-270 and transfer the credit amount from Form IT-270 to Form IT-201, line 70a. Submit Form IT-270 with your return. 
 Line 71: Other refundable credits 
 Enter the total amount of other refundable credits from Form IT-201-ATT, Part 1, Section D, line 18. 
 Lines 72, 73, and 74: Total New York State, New York City, and Yonkers tax withheld 
 Forms W-2 and IT-2 
 If you received a federal Form W-2,  Wage and Tax Statement : 
 
 Confirm that your Social Security number on your federal Form W-2 is correct. If there is an error, contact your employer to issue you a corrected form (Form W-2c,  Corrected Wage and Tax Statement) . 
 Complete Form IT-2,  Summary of W-2 Statements , for  all  federal Forms W-2 (or W-2c) you received. You  must  complete a W-2 record for each W-2 you receive, even if it does not show any New York State, New York City (NYC), or Yonkers wages or tax withheld. Submit as many Forms IT-2 as you need to report all your W-2s. 
 
 Foreign income 
 If you received foreign income but did not receive a federal Form W-2, you must complete Form IT-2. 
 Form IT-1099-R 
 If you had New York State, New York City, or Yonkers tax withheld from annuities, pensions, retirement pay, or IRA payments, you must complete  Form IT-1099-R ,  Summary of Federal Form 1099-R Statements . Submit as many Forms IT-1099-R as you need to report all the Forms 1099-R you received. 
 Enter on the appropriate line your total New York State, New York City, and Yonkers tax withheld from any of the following: 
 
 Form IT-2,  Summary of W-2 Statements  
 Form IT-1099-R,  Summary of Federal Form 1099-R Statements  
 Form 1099-G,  Certain Government Payments  
 Form W-2G,  Certain Gambling Winnings  
 
 Submit all your Forms IT-2 and IT-1099-R with your Form IT-201. In addition, submit any federal Forms 1099-G and W-2G that show any New York State, New York City, and Yonkers tax withheld. 
 Do  not  submit federal Form W-2 or 1099-R with your return. Keep copies of those forms and the forms you submitted with your return for your records. 
 Tip: Review your withholding frequently 
 Did you owe tax or receive a large refund this year? You may want to adjust the amount of New York State, New York City, or Yonkers tax you ask your employer to withhold on your behalf. Complete  Form IT-2104 ,  Employee’s Withholding Allowance   Certificate , and give it to your employer. 
 Line 75: Total estimated tax payments and amount paid with Form IT-370 
 Enter the total of: 
 
 your 2025 estimated tax payments for New York State, New York City, Yonkers, and metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax (include your last installment even if paid in 2026). If you marked filing status ②‚ but made  separate  2025 estimated tax payments (Form IT-2105,  Estimated Tax Payment Voucher for Individuals ), enter your combined total estimated tax paid; 
 any amount of overpayment from your 2024 personal income tax return that you applied to your 2025 estimated tax (if this amount was adjusted by the Tax Department, use the adjusted amount); and 
 any amount you paid with  Form IT-370 ,  Application for Automatic Six-Month Extension of Time to File for Individuals  (or Form IT-370-V,  Payment Voucher and Instructions for Form IT-370 Filed Online  ) . If you marked filing status ②‚ but you and your spouse filed separate Forms IT-370, enter the total amount you and your spouse paid. 
 
 Do not include any amounts you paid for the  New York City  unincorporated business tax. File New York City Form NYC-202 or Form NYC-202S directly with the New York City Department of Finance. 
 You can check your balance and reconcile your estimated tax account by going to our website or by writing us at: 
 NYS TAX DEPARTMENT ESTIMATED TAX UNIT W A HARRIMAN CAMPUS ALBANY NY 12227-0822 
 If not using U.S. Mail, see  Publication 55 ,  Designated Private Delivery Services.  
 Beneficiaries of an estate or trust 
 If you are a beneficiary of an estate or trust and are claiming your portion of any payment of estimated taxes allocated to you by the estate or trust, include your amount on line 75 and submit a copy of the notification issued by the estate or trust with your return. This notification must include the name and identifying number of the estate or trust and the amount allocated to you. 
   Step 9: Calculate your refund or the amount you owe 
 Line 77: Amount overpaid 
 If you have to pay an estimated tax penalty (see line 81 instructions), subtract the penalty from the overpayment and enter the net overpayment on line 77. 
 You may choose to have your net overpayment: 
 
 refunded to you (enter amount on line 78 or 78b); 
 applied to your 2026 estimated tax (enter on line 79); 
 directly deposited into a NYS 529 account (line 78a);  or  
 divided between the above three options. 
 
 If your estimated tax penalty on line 81 is greater than your overpayment on line 77, enter the difference on line 80 (amount you owe). 
 Collection of debts from your overpayment (offsets) 
 We will keep all or part of your overpayment (refund) if you owe any of the following: 
 
 New York State tax liability 
 New York City or Yonkers personal income tax liability 
 metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax liability 
 a New York City tax warrant judgment debt 
 defaulted governmental education, state university, or city university loan 
 past-due support 
 a past-due legally enforceable debt to:
 
 the IRS, 
 a  New York State agency , or 
 another state 
 
 
 
 We will refund any amount that exceeds your debts in the same proportion as you directed on lines 78 through 79. 
 A  New York State agency  includes any state department, board, bureau, division, commission, committee, public authority, public benefit corporation, council, office, or other entity performing a governmental or proprietary function for the state or a social services district. 
 If you have questions about whether you owe a past-due legally enforceable debt to the IRS, to another state, or to a New York State agency, contact the IRS, the other state, or the New York State agency. 
 For New York State tax liabilities, New York City or Yonkers personal income tax liabilities, or metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax liabilities, call 518-457-5434 or write to: 
 NYS TAX DEPARTMENT  CIVIL ENFORCEMENT DIVISION W A HARRIMAN CAMPUS  ALBANY NY 12227-4000 
 If not using U.S. Mail, see  Publication 55 ,  Designated Private Delivery Services.  
   Nonobligated spouse (disclaiming your spouse’s debt) 
 If you marked filing status ②‚ and you do not want to apply your part of the overpayment to your spouse’s debt because you are not liable (legally responsible) for it, complete  Form IT-280 ,  Nonobligated Spouse Allocation , and submit it with your original return. We need the information on Form IT-280 to process your refund as quickly as possible. You cannot file an amended return to disclaim your spouse’s debt after you have filed your original return. 
 We will notify you if we keep your overpayment because of a past-due legally enforceable debt to the IRS or a tax debt to another state. You cannot use Form IT-280 to disclaim liability for a legally enforceable debt to the IRS or to disclaim a tax liability owed to another state. You must contact the IRS or the other state to resolve your responsibility for the liability. 
 Line 78: Amount of line 77 available for refund 
 Subtract the amount on line 79 (estimated tax) from line 77. This is the amount available for refund. This is also the amount you will need to enter when you  check the status of your refund.  
 Line 78a: NYS 529 account deposit 
 You may directly deposit all or a portion of your refund in up to three NYS 529 college savings accounts. Use  Form IT-195 ,  Allocation of Refund , and its  instructions  below in these instructions to report the amount of your refund that you want deposited into up to three NYS 529 college savings accounts. You cannot change your election to contribute all or a portion of your refund into any NYS 529 account after you file your return. Do  not  submit Form IT-195 with an  amended return . 
 Enter on line 78a the amount from Form IT-195, line 4. 
 Line 78b: Total refund after NYS 529 account deposit 
 You must file a return to request a refund. 
 Enter the amount of your overpayment you want refunded to you. You can choose either  direct deposit  to have the funds deposited directly into your bank account, or a  paper check  mailed to you. Mark an   X   in one box to indicate your choice. 
 If you choose to deposit all or a portion of your overpayment amount (line 77) into one or more NYS 529 accounts, see the instructions for line 78a and Form IT-195 and its  instructions . 
 Refund options 
 Direct deposit 
 Direct deposit is the  fastest and easiest  way to get your refund. 
 If you choose direct deposit, enter your personal or business account information on line 83 for a fast and secure direct deposit of your refund (see   line 83 instructions ).  
 Generally, the Tax Department will  not  notify you that your refund has been deposited. However, your refund status will update with the approximate date your refund is scheduled to be directly deposited. You can also request email notification with your direct deposit date. See  Sign up for electronic communications  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  to learn how (search:  communications ). 
  Notes:  
 
 If the amount we deposit is different from the amount of refund you claimed, we will send you a written explanation of the adjustment within two weeks from the date your refund is deposited. 
 If we cannot make the direct deposit for any reason (for example, you did not enter complete and correct account information on line 83), we will send your refund as a paper check to the mailing address on your return. 
 
 If your bank information is for an account outside the U.S., we cannot directly deposit your refund and will mail you a paper check. (see  Accounts outside the U.S. ) 
 Paper checks 
 The Tax Department will mail your refund check to the mailing address you enter on your return. We will issue paper checks for joint filers with both names and both spouses must sign the check to cash or deposit it. 
 Reconsider direct deposit: 
 
 Paper checks take weeks to be processed, printed, and mailed. 
 If you do not have a bank account, you will likely be charged a fee to cash your check. 
 
 Line 79: Estimated tax 
 Enter the amount of overpayment from line 77 that you want applied to your New York State, New York City, Yonkers, and metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax estimated tax for 2026. The total of lines 78a through 79 should equal the amount on line 77. 
   Line 80: Amount you owe 
 Enter on line 80 the amount of tax you owe  plus any estimated tax penalty  you owe (see line 81 instructions) and  any other penalties and interest  you owe (see line 82 instructions). 
 If you choose to have your payment withdrawn directly from your bank account (paying by electronic funds withdrawal), complete the following: 
 
 Mark an   X   in the box. 
 Enter your account information on line 83. 
 Enter your electronic funds withdrawal information on line 84. 
 
 To avoid other penalties and interest, pay any tax you owe by April 15, 2026. 
 For additional information on penalties and interest, see  Interest and penalties  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  penalties ). 
 Line 81: Penalty for underpaying your tax (estimated tax penalty) 
 You may owe an estimated tax penalty if you did not have enough tax withheld from your wages or did not make enough estimated tax payments on other income you earned during the year. We call these  prepayments . 
 To determine if you may owe an estimated tax penalty, you will need the following information: 
 
 the amount of your  2024 New York adjusted gross income  as shown on your 2024 return, 
 the amount of your  2024 New York income tax , and 
 the total amount of your  2025 prepayments  (the amount of withholding and estimated tax payments you have already made or which were paid on your behalf by a partnership or S corporation for 2025). 
 
 In general, you are not subject to a penalty if your  2025 prepayments  equal at least 100% of your  2024 New York income tax  based on a 12-month return. 
 However, if your  2024 New York adjusted gross income  was more than $150,000 (or $75,000 if you are married filing separately for 2025) and you are not a farmer or a fisherman, your  2025   prepayments  must equal at least 110% of your  2024 New York income tax  based on a 12-month return. 
 You may owe a penalty: 
 
 if line 80 is $300 or more and represents more than 10% of the income tax shown on your 2025 return; or 
 if you underpaid your estimated tax liability for any payment period. 
 
 For more information, see  Form IT-2105.9 ,  Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals and Fiduciaries , and its  instructions .  
 If you owe an estimated tax penalty: 
 
 Enter the penalty amount on line 81. 
 Add the same amount to any tax due. 
 Enter the total on line 80. 
 
 It is possible for you to owe an estimated tax penalty  and also  be due a refund. In that case: 
 
 Subtract the estimated tax penalty amount from the overpayment. 
 Enter the net result on line 77.  Do not include any other penalty or interest amounts on line 77.  
 
 In either case, submit Form IT-2105.9 with your return. 
 Line 82: Other penalties and interest 
 If you owe a late filing penalty, late payment penalty, or interest: 
 
 Calculate the penalty and interest using the  Penalty and Interest Calculator  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search : penalty ). 
 Enter the penalty and interest amount on line 82. 
 Include that amount in the total on line 80. 
 
   Payment options 
 Pay with your return 
 Authorize the Tax Department to make an automatic withdrawal from your bank account (electronic funds withdrawal) by completing  line 83   .   (This payment option is not available if the funds for your payment would come from an  account outside the U.S. ) 
 You must specify a future payment date up to and including April 15, 2026. If you file before April 15, money will not be withdrawn from your account before the date you specify. To avoid interest and penalties, you must authorize a withdrawal on or before the filing deadline. If you designate a weekend or a bank holiday, the payment will be withdrawn the next business day. See line 83 instructions. 
 Pay by check or money order 
 If you owe more than one dollar, include full payment with your return. Make check or money order payable in U.S. funds to   New York State Income Tax   and write the last four digits of your Social Security number and   2025 Income Tax   on it.  Do not send cash . 
 You must submit Form IT-201-V,  Payment Voucher for Income Tax Returns , if you are making a payment by check or money order. For additional information, see  Form IT-201-V . 
 Pay online 
 You may pay online through your Individual Online Services account.  Log in  to your account (or  create one ) to: 
 
 authorize an automatic bank withdrawal from a bank account within the U.S. (This payment option is not available if the funds for your payment would come from an account outside the U.S.) 
 pay by debit or credit card (vendor convenience fee applies) 
 
 For more information, see  Make a personal income tax return payment online  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  pay ) 
 Fee for payments returned by banks 
 The law allows the Tax Department to charge a $50 fee when a check, money order, or electronic payment is returned by a bank for nonpayment. However, if an electronic payment is returned as a result of an error by the bank or the department, the department won’t charge the fee. 
 If your payment is returned, we will send a separate bill for $50 for each return or other tax document associated with the returned payment. 
 Unable to pay? 
  To avoid interest and penalty charges, you must file your return and pay the total amount you owe by April 15, 2026.  
 It is in your best interest to pay the amount you owe in full by the due date. If you cannot pay in full, file your return on time, and pay as much of the tax due as possible by automatic bank withdrawal, check, or money order. You may also pay by credit card (convenience fee applies). 
 We will bill you for any unpaid tax plus interest and penalty if applicable (see  Amount you owe ) .  Pay the bill immediately if you can; if you cannot, you may qualify for an installment payment agreement (IPA). If you would like to request an IPA, see Special condition  Code C2 . For more information about IPAs, see  Installment payment agreement (IPA)  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  IPA ). 
 Failure to pay 
 If you fail to pay the amount due or to arrange to pay, New York State may do one or more of the following: 
 
 file a tax warrant (see  Tax warrants  for more information or to use our online  New York State Tax Warrants search  tool on our website) 
 seize your assets (see  Seizures  and  Levies  on our website) 
 suspend your driver's license (see  Driver’s license suspension  on our website) 
 garnish your wages to ensure payment (see  Income executions  on our website) 
 
   Line 83: Account information 
 Accounts within the U.S. 
 If your payment (or refund) would come from (or go to) an account within the U.S., supply the information requested for lines 83a, 83b, and 83c. 
   Accounts outside the U.S. 
 Banking rules prohibit us from honoring requests for electronic funds withdrawal or direct deposit when the funds for your payment (or refund) would come from (or go to) an account outside the U.S. 
 If you marked the box that indicates your payment (or refund) would come from (or go to) an account outside the U.S.,  stop . Do  not  complete lines 83a, 83b, or 83c. You must pay any amount you owe by check, money order, or credit card (see  Payment options ) or if you are requesting a refund, we will send your refund to the mailing address on your return. 
 The following requirements apply to both direct deposit and electronic funds withdrawal: 
 Use the sample image as a guide; enter your own information  exactly  as it appears on your own check or bank records. Do  not  enter the information from the sample check below. 
 On  line 83a , mark an   X   in the box for the type of account. 
 On  line 83b , enter your bank’s 9-digit routing number (refer to your check or contact your bank). The first two digits always begin with 01 through 12, or 21 through 32. On the sample check below, the routing number is  111111111 . 
  Note:  If your check states that it is payable through a bank different from the one where you have your checking account, do not use the routing number on that check. Instead, contact your bank for the correct routing number to enter on line 83b. 
 On  line 83c , enter  your  account number. 
 
 If you marked personal or business checking on line 83a, enter the account number shown on your checks. 
 If you marked personal or business savings on line 83a, enter your savings account number from a preprinted savings account deposit slip, your passbook or other bank records, or from your bank. 
 
 The account number can be up to 17 characters (both numbers and letters). Include hyphens (-) but omit spaces and special symbols. Enter the number from left to right. On the sample check below, the account number is  9999999999 . 
   
  Notes:  
 
 The routing and account numbers may appear in different places on your check. 
 Before you file, contact your bank if you need to verify routing and account numbers or confirm that it will accept your direct deposit or process your electronic funds withdrawal. 
 
 If you encounter any problem with direct deposit to, or electronic withdrawal from, your account, call 518-457-5181. Allow six to eight weeks for processing your return. 
 Line 84: Electronic funds withdrawal 
 Enter the date you want the Tax Department to automatically withdraw your payment from your bank account. Enter a date that is on or before the due date of your return. If we receive your return after the due date or you do not enter a date, we will withdraw the funds on the day we accept your return. 
 Enter the amount from line 80 you want electronically withdrawn. We will only withdraw the amount that you authorize. 
 Your payment confirmation will be your bank statement that includes an  NYS Tax Payment  line item. 
  Notes:  
 
 You may only revoke your electronic funds withdrawal authorization if you contact the Tax Department  at least 5 business days  before the payment date. 
 If we determine that the amount you owe is different from the amount claimed on your return, we will issue you a refund for any amount overpaid or send you a bill for any additional amount owed,  which may include penalty and interest.  
 
  Reminder:  If you complete the entries to request electronic funds withdrawal,  do not  send a check or money order for the same amount due unless you receive a notice. 
   Step 10: Sign and date your return 
 Third-party designee 
 Do you want to authorize a friend, family member, return preparer, or any other individual (third-party designee) to discuss this tax return and questions arising from it with the New York State Tax Department? 
 
 If   No  , mark an   X   in the  No  box. 
 If   Yes  , mark an   X   in the  Yes  box.
 
 Print the designee’s name, phone number, email address, and any five numbers the designee chooses as their personal identification number (PIN). 
 If you want to authorize the paid preparer who signed your return to discuss it with the Tax Department, print the preparer’s name and phone number in the spaces for the designee’s name and phone number (you do not have to provide an email address or PIN). 
 
 
 
 If you mark the  Yes  box, you (and your spouse, if filing a joint return) are authorizing the Tax Department to discuss with the designee any questions related to this return. You are also authorizing the designee to give and receive confidential taxpayer information relating to: 
 
 this return, including missing information, 
 any notices or bills arising from this filing that you share with the designee (they will not be sent to the designee), 
 any payments and collection activity arising from this filing, and 
 the status of your return or refund. 
 
 This authorization will not expire but will only cover matters relating to this return. If you decide to revoke this designee’s authority at any time, call the  Individual Contact Center  for assistance. 
 You are not authorizing the designee to receive your refund, bind you to anything (including any additional tax liability), or otherwise represent you before the Tax Department. If you want someone to represent you or perform services for you beyond the scope of the third-party designee, you must designate the person using a power of attorney (for example, Form POA-1,  Power of Attorney ). 
 For additional information on third-party designees and other types of authorizations, see  Power of attorney and other authorizations  or visit our website at  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  POA-1 ). 
 Paid preparer’s signature 
 If you pay someone to prepare your return, the paid preparer must also sign it and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer’s area of your return. A person who prepares your return and does not charge you should not fill in the paid preparer’s area. 
  Paid preparer’s responsibilities : Under the law, all paid preparers must sign and complete the paid preparer section of the return. Paid preparers may be subject to civil and/or criminal sanctions if they fail to complete this section in full. 
 When completing this section, enter your New York tax preparer registration identification number (NYTPRIN) if you are required to have one. If you are not required to have a NYTPRIN, enter in the  NYTPRIN excl. code  box one of the specified 2-digit codes listed below that indicates why you are exempt from the registration requirement. You  must  enter a NYTPRIN  or  an exclusion code. Also, you must enter your federal preparer tax identification number (PTIN) if you have one; if not, you must enter your Social Security number. 
  Exemption types by code 
 
 
 Code 
 Exemption type 
 Code 
 Exemption type 
 
 
 01 
 Attorney 
 02 
 Employee of attorney 
 
 
 03 
 CPA 
 04 
 Employee of CPA 
 
 
 05 
 PA (Public Accountant) 
 06 
 Employee of PA 
 
 
 07 
 Enrolled agent 
 08 
 Employee of enrolled agent 
 
 
 09 
 Volunteer tax preparer 
 10 
 Employee of business preparing that business' return 
 
 
 
 See our website for more information about the tax preparer registration requirements. 
 Your signature 
 In the spaces provided at the bottom of page 4, sign and date your  original  return and enter your occupation. 
 Joint returns 
 If you are married and filing a joint return, enter your spouse’s occupation. Both spouses must sign a joint return;  we cannot process unsigned returns . Keep your signatures within the spaces provided. 
 If the return is for someone who died and there is no surviving spouse to sign it, print or type the name and address of the person signing it below the signature. 
 For additional information about deceased taxpayers, see  Deceased taxpayers . 
 Daytime phone number 
 This entry will enable the Tax Department to correct minor errors or omissions by calling you rather than writing or sending back your return. 
   Step 11: Finish your return 
 Take a moment to go over your return to avoid errors that may delay your refund. If you are filing a paper return, finish your return as shown below.  Do not staple any items to the return.  
 
  Make a copy of your return,  and any other forms or papers you are submitting, for your records. You may be asked by the Tax Department to provide copies of these records after you have filed your income tax return. We may also ask you to refer to a previous return for verification purposes if you contact us for assistance. 
  Enclose the following  in an envelope (see illustration):
 
 your check or money order and Form IT-201-V if you owe tax and are not paying by another option 
 your original, signed return 
 other forms, including Form IT-196, Form IT-225, Form IT-227, and Form IT-201-ATT 
 any correspondence and computation sheets 
 Form IT-2 (and Forms IT-1099-R, 1099-G, and W-2G, if applicable).  Do not send federal Form W-2 or 1099-R        
 
 
  Include the following  on your envelope:
 
 your return address 
 enough postage (some returns require additional postage) 
 the appropriate mailing address (see below) 
 
 
  Mail your return  by April 15, 2026.
 
 If  enclosing  a payment (check or money order and Form IT-201-V), mail to: STATE PROCESSING CENTER  PO BOX 15555  ALBANY NY 12212-5555    
 If  not enclosing  a payment, mail to: STATE PROCESSING CENTER  PO BOX 61000  ALBANY NY 12261-0001  
 
 
 
 Private delivery services 
 If you choose, you may use a private delivery service, instead of the U.S. Postal Service, to mail in your form and tax payment. However, if, at a later date, you need to establish the date you filed or paid your tax, you cannot use the date recorded by a private delivery service  unless  you used a delivery service that has been designated by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury or the Commissioner of Taxation and Finance. (Currently designated delivery services are listed in  Publication 55 ,  Designated Private Delivery Services . See  Need help?  for information on obtaining forms and publications.) If you have used a designated private delivery service and need to establish the date you filed your form, contact that private delivery service for instructions on how to obtain written proof of the date your form was given to the delivery service for delivery. See Publication 55 for where to send the forms covered by these instructions. 
 Privacy notification 
 New York State Law requires all government agencies that maintain a system of records to provide notification of the legal authority for any request for personal information, the principal purposes for which the information is to be collected, and where it will be maintained. To view this information, visit  www.tax.ny.gov , or, if you do not have Internet access, call and request Publication 54,  Privacy Notification . See  Need help?  for the web address and telephone number. 
 
   Instructions for Form IT-195,  Allocation of Refund  
 Purpose of Form IT-195 
 You must complete  Form IT-195  and submit it with your return if you want to directly deposit all or a portion of your refund in up to three NYS 529 college savings accounts.  There is no minimum deposit into the College Savings Program Direct Plan. The minimum deposit into the Advisor Guided College Savings Program is $25.  
 The NYS 529 accounts  must  be in one of the following plans: 
 
 New York's 529 College Savings Program Direct Plan, or 
 New York's 529 Advisor Guided College Savings Program. 
 
 You  cannot  use Form IT-195 to authorize a direct deposit into another state's 529 plan. 
 You do not need to be the NYS 529 account owner to directly deposit all or a part of your refund into a NYS 529 account. However, if you are the account owner you may qualify for a New York State subtraction modification for the tax year in which your contribution is made. 
 You cannot change your election to contribute all or a portion of your refund into any NYS 529 account after you file your return. 
 Line instructions 
 Enter your name and Social Security number as shown on your Form IT-201. If you are filing a joint return, enter both names and the Social Security number of the taxpayer listed first on your Form IT-201. 
  Part 1 :  NYS 529 savings account direct deposit  
 Enter all information in boxes a, b, c, and d for each account into which you want to make a direct deposit of your refund. 
  Lines 1a, 2a, and 3a : The minimum deposit into the  Advisor Guided College Savings Program  is $25. 
  Lines 1b, 2b, and 3b : Enter the routing number,   011001234  , on lines 1b, 2b, and 3b as applicable. This is the routing number for all NYS 529 college savings accounts for tax year 2025. 
  Lines 1c, 2c, and 3c : Enter the 3-digit plan code (see below) for each account into which you want to make a direct deposit of your refund. 
 
 
 
 Plan code 
 Description 
 
 
 552 
 New York’s 529 College Savings Program Direct Plan 
 
 
 553 
 New York’s 529 Advisor Guided College Savings Program 
 
 
 
  Lines 1d, 2d, and 3d : Enter the 11-digit account number for each account into which you want to make a direct deposit of your refund. 
 If you fail to enter all the information, your NYS 529 college savings account direct deposit will be rejected. In addition, if we adjust your overpayment (line 77 amount) to an amount less than you calculated or if we keep all or part of your overpayment due to collection of a debt, your entire NYS 529 direct deposit request will be rejected. If your NYS 529 direct deposit is rejected, you will receive an adjusted refund with a written explanation of the adjustment. 
 If you would like more information on NYS 529 savings accounts, or if you do not know or cannot find the NYS 529 college savings account numbers, or if you are not sure which plan code to use, contact either: 
 
  New York’s 529 College Savings Program Direct Plan , by calling 1 877 697-2837 or visiting  www.nysaves.org ; or 
  New York’s 529 Advisor Guided College Savings Program , by calling 1 800 774-2108 or visiting  www.ny529advisor.com  .  
 
 
   Instructions for Form IT-201-ATT,  Other Tax Credits and Taxes  
 Purpose of Form IT-201-ATT 
 You must complete  Form IT-201-ATT  and submit it with your Form IT-201 if: 
 
 you are claiming other New York State, New York City, Yonkers, or metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax credits that are not entered directly on Form IT-201; or 
 you are subject to other New York State or New York City taxes. 
 
 Line instructions 
 
 Enter your name and Social Security number exactly as you entered them on your Form IT-201. 
 If you are filing a joint return, enter both names and the Social Security number of the taxpayer you listed first on your Form IT-201. 
 Complete the appropriate form for each credit you are claiming (see  Income tax credit forms  for a complete list). 
 Complete the appropriate form for each additional New York State or New York City tax you may have to pay. 
 Follow each form’s instructions for how to enter the  money amount  and  code number  for each on Form IT-201-ATT. 
 Submit all applicable credit forms and tax calculations with your Form IT-201. 
 
 See the specific instructions for lines 1, 6, 9, and 22 below. 
 Line A 
 If you (or an S corporation of which you are a shareholder, or partnership of which you are a partner) are convicted of an offense defined in New York State Penal Law Article 200 ( Bribery Involving Public Servants and Related Offenses ) or 496 ( Corrupting the Government ), or § 195.20 ( Defrauding the Government ), you must mark an   X   in the  Yes  box. If you marked   Yes  , you are not eligible for any tax credit allowed under Tax Law Article 9, 9-A, or 33, or any business tax credits allowed under Tax Law Article 22. A  business tax credit allowed under Article 22  is a tax credit allowed to taxpayers under Article 22 that is substantially similar to a tax credit allowed to taxpayers under Article 9-A. 
 Line 1 
 If you received an accumulation distribution as a beneficiary of a trust, you may be allowed an accumulation distribution credit for your share of: 
 
 New York State income taxes paid by the trust,* and 
 any income tax imposed on the trust by another state, political subdivision within that state, or District of Columbia on income sourced to the other jurisdiction.* 
 
 *These amounts should be provided to you by the trust. 
 However, this credit: 
 
 cannot be more than the percent of tax due determined by dividing the portion of the income taxable to the trust in the other jurisdiction and taxable to the beneficiary in New York by the beneficiary’s total New York Income, and 
 may not reduce your tax due to an amount less than would have been due if the accumulation distribution was excluded from your New York adjusted gross income. 
 
 Submit a copy of the calculation of your New York State accumulation distribution credit and enter the amount of the credit on line 1. 
 Line 6: Special instructions for residential fuel oil storage tank credit carryover and solar and wind energy credit carryover 
 Residential fuel oil storage tank credit carryover 
 There is no form for calculating the residential fuel oil storage tank credit carryover. If you are using any unused credit from last year, you must submit a schedule showing how you calculated the amount being used. Enter the amount and code   054   on a line between lines 6a through 6n. 
 Solar and wind energy credit carryover 
 There is no form for calculating the solar and wind energy credit carryover. If you are using any unused credit from last year, you must submit a schedule showing how you calculated the amount being used. Enter the amount and code   052   on a line between lines 6a through 6n. 
 Line 9 
 Calculate your NYC accumulation distribution credit using the worksheet below. If you received an accumulation distribution as a beneficiary of a trust, you may be allowed an accumulation distribution credit for your share of: 
 
 NYC income taxes paid by the trust,* and 
 any income tax imposed on the trust by another state, political subdivision within that state, or District of Columbia on income sourced to the other jurisdiction.* 
 
 *These amounts should be provided to you by the trust. 
 However, this credit: 
 
 cannot be more than the percentage of NYC tax due determined by dividing the portion of the income taxable to the trust in the other jurisdiction and taxable to the beneficiary’s total NYC income, and 
 may not reduce your tax due to an amount less than would have been due if the accumulation distribution was excluded from your New York adjusted gross income. 
 
 Submit a copy of the calculation of your New York City accumulation distribution credit and enter the amount of the credit on line 9. 
  NYC accumulation distribution credit worksheet 
 
 
 1. Enter the amount from Form IT-201, line 49 
 1. _______ 
 
 
 2. Enter the amount from Form IT-201-ATT, line 33 
 2.  _______  
 
 
 3. Add lines 1 and 2 
 3. _______ 
 
 
 4. Enter New York City accumulation distribution credit 
 4. _______ 
 
 
 5. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 here and on Form IT-201-ATT, line 9. This is your allowable New York City accumulation distribution credit 
 5. _______ 
 
 
 
 Line 22 
 If the amount on Form IT-201, line 40 is  equal to or less than  the amount on Form IT-201, line 39, enter the amount from Form IT-201, line 43 on line 22. 
 If the amount on Form IT-201, line 40 is  more than  the amount on Form IT-201, line 39, complete the  Line 22 worksheet . 
  Line 22 worksheet 
 
 
 1. Enter the amount from Form IT-201, line 39 
 1. _______ 
 
 
 2. Enter the amount from Form IT-201, line 41 
 2. _______ 
 
 
 3. Enter the amount from Form IT-201, line 42 
 3.  _______  
 
 
 4. Add lines 1, 2 and 3, and enter the total here and on line 22 
 4. _______ 
 
 
 
 
   Additional information 
 Definitions used to determine resident, nonresident, or part-year resident 
 You may have to pay income tax as a New York State resident even if you are not considered a resident for other purposes. For income tax purposes, your resident status depends on where you were domiciled and where you maintained a permanent place of abode during the tax year. See  Income tax definitions  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  definitions ) to determine your residency for income tax purposes. See also: 
 Domicile 
 In general, your  domicile  is the place you intend to have as your permanent home. Your domicile is, in effect, where your permanent home is located. It is the place you intend to return to after being away (as on vacation abroad, business assignment, educational leave, or military assignment). 
  You can have only one domicile.  Your New York domicile does not change until you can demonstrate that you have  abandoned  your New York domicile and established a new permanent domicile outside New York State. 
  A change of domicile must be clear and convincing.  Easily controlled factors such as where you vote, where your driver’s license and registration are issued, or where your will is located are not primary factors in establishing domicile. To determine whether you have, in fact, changed your domicile, you should compare: 
 
 the size, value, and nature of use of your first residence to the size, value, and nature of use of your newly acquired residence; 
 your employment or business connections, or both in both locations; 
 the amount of time spent in both locations; 
 the physical location of items that have significant sentimental value to you in both locations; and 
 your close family ties in both locations. 
 
 A change of domicile is  clear and convincing  only when your primary ties are clearly  greater  in the new location. When weighing your primary ties, keep in mind that some may weigh more heavily than others, depending upon your overall lifestyle. If required by the Tax Department, it is the taxpayer’s responsibility to produce documentation showing the necessary intention to effect a change of domicile. 
 If you move to a new location but intend to stay there only for a limited amount of time (no matter how long), your domicile does not change.  
  Example :  An employee of ABC Electronics in Newburgh, New York, was temporarily assigned to the Atlanta, Georgia branch office for two years. After the employee's stay in Atlanta, they returned to their job in New York. The employee's domicile did not change during their stay in Georgia; it remained New York State.  
 If your domicile is in New York State and you go to a foreign country because of a business assignment by your employer, or for study, research or any other purpose, your domicile does not change unless you show that you definitely do not intend to return to New York. 
 Permanent place of abode 
 In general, a  permanent place of abode  is a residence (a building or structure where a person can live) that you permanently maintain, whether you own it or not, that is suitable for year-round use. A permanent place of abode usually includes a residence your spouse owns or leases. 
 However, a residence maintained by a full-time student enrolled at an institution of higher education in an undergraduate degree program leading to a baccalaureate degree and occupied by the student while attending the institution is not a permanent place of abode with respect to that student. For additional information, see  TSB-M-09(15)I ,  Amendment to the Definition of Permanent Place of Abode in the Personal Income Tax Regulations Relating to Certain Undergraduate Students . 
  Note:  Special rules under the SCRA apply to members of the military and their spouses for determining residency. For more information, visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  military ). 
   Resident 
 You are a New York State resident for income tax purposes if: 
 
 You maintain a permanent place of abode in New York State for substantially all of the tax year and spend  184 days or more  in New York State during the tax year*; whether or not you were domiciled in New York State (unless you were in active service in the military).  *Any part of a day is a day for this purpose.   Note:  If you maintain a permanent place of abode in New York State but are claiming to be a nonresident for tax purposes, you must be able to provide adequate records to substantiate that you did not spend more than 183 days of the tax year in New York State.     
 Your domicile is New York State. However, even if your domicile is New York, you are not a resident if you meet  all three  of the conditions in either Group A or Group B as follows:
 
 Group A
 
 You did not maintain any permanent place of abode in New York State during the tax year; and 
 You maintained a permanent place of abode outside New York State during the entire tax year; and 
 You spent  30 days or less  (a part of a day is a day for this purpose) in New York State during the tax year.   
 
 
 Group B
 
 You were in a foreign country for at least 450 days (a part of a day is a day for this purpose) during any period of 548 consecutive days; and 
 You, your spouse (unless legally separated) and minor children spent  90 days or less  (a part of a day is a day for this purpose) in New York State during this 548-day period; and 
 During the nonresident portion of the tax year in which the 548-day period begins, and during the nonresident portion of the tax year in which the 548-day period ends, you were present in New York State for no more than the number of days which bears the same ratio to 90 as the number of days in such portion of the tax year bears to 548. The following formula illustrates this condition: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Number of days in the nonresident portion  548 
 x 
 90 
 = 
 Maximum number of days allowed in New York State 
 
 
 
   Nonresident 
 You are a New York State nonresident if you were not a resident of New York State for any part of the year. 
   Part-year resident 
 You are a New York State part-year resident if you meet the definition of resident or nonresident for only part of the year. 
 New York City and Yonkers 
 For the definition of a  New York City  or  Yonkers  resident, nonresident, and part-year resident, see the definitions of a New York State resident, nonresident, and part-year resident above, and substitute  New York City  or  Yonkers  in place of  New York State.  
 For more information on nonresidents and part-year residents, see the  instructions for Form IT-203 . 
 Special accruals 
 As a full-year New York State resident for 2025, or if you are a full-year New York City resident or New York City part-year resident for 2025, you may have to use special accrual rules (see below) to calculate your New York State and New York City personal income tax for 2025. 
 If you are subject to the special accrual rules, see the  instructions for Form IT-225 , addition modification number A-115 and subtraction modification number S-129. 
 Full-year New York State residents 
 You are subject to the special accrual rules  only  if you have accrued income for 2025  and  
 
 you were a nonresident of New York State on December 31, 2024; or 
 you will be a New York State nonresident on January 1, 2026. 
 
 You have accrued income for 2025 if you have an item of: 
 
  non-New York source income  that was fixed and determinable in a tax year prior to 2025, but you are reporting that income for federal income tax purposes in tax year 2025; or 
 income that was fixed and determinable in tax year 2025, but you will be reporting that income for federal income tax purposes in a tax year after 2025. 
 
 Full-year and part-year New York City residents 
 You are subject to the special accrual rules  only  if you have accrued income for 2025 (see below),  and  you were a: 
 
 nonresident of New York City on December 31, 2024, but you were a full-year New York City resident for tax year 2025; or 
 full-year New York City resident for 2025 but you will be a New York City nonresident on January 1, 2026; or 
 New York City part-year resident for tax year 2025. 
 
 You have accrued income for 2025 if you have an item of: 
 
 non-New York source income that was fixed and determinable in a tax year prior to 2025, but you are reporting that income for federal income tax purposes in tax year 2025; or 
 income that was fixed and determinable in tax year 2025, but you will be reporting that income for federal income tax purposes in a tax year after 2025; or 
 income that was fixed and determinable in your 2025 New York City resident period, but that income is not reportable for federal income tax purposes in your 2025 New York City resident period; or 
  non-New York source income*  that was fixed and determinable in your 2025 New York City nonresident period, but that income is not reportable for federal income tax purposes in your 2025 New York City nonresident period. 
 
    *Non-New York source income  is income that is  not  attributable to: 
 
 a business, trade, profession, or occupation carried on in  New York State , or 
 the ownership of any interest in real or tangible personal property in  New York State . 
 
 Estates and trusts 
 Estates and trusts are subject to New York State personal income tax. The fiduciary for an estate or trust must file  Form IT-205 ,  Fiduciary Income Tax Return.  If you are a beneficiary of an estate or trust, you must include your share of the estate or trust income on your Form IT-201. 
 For more information on responsibilities of beneficiaries, see  Beneficiaries (estates and trusts  ) . 
   Deceased taxpayers 
 If a taxpayer died after 2024 and before filing a return for 2025, the taxpayer’s spouse or personal representative may have to file and  sign  a return for that taxpayer. A personal representative can be an executor, administrator or anyone who is in charge of the deceased taxpayer’s property. 
 If a deceased taxpayer did not have to file a federal return but had New York State tax withheld, their spouse or personal representative must file a New York State income tax return to request a refund. Write the deceased taxpayer’s date of death in the area indicated near the top of the return. 
 Joint returns 
 If you filed a joint federal income tax return for yourself and your deceased spouse, you may also file a joint New York State return on Form IT-201: 
 
 Write   Filing as surviving spouse   in the area where you sign the return. 
 Write the deceased taxpayer’s date of death in the area indicated near the top of the return. 
 If you are the personal representative for the deceased taxpayer, you must also sign the joint return. 
 
 Partnerships/limited liability partnerships or companies 
 Partnerships, limited liability partnerships (LLPs) and limited liability companies (LLCs), limited liability investment companies (LLICs) and limited liability trust companies (LLTCs) that are treated as partnerships for federal purposes are not subject to New York State personal income tax, but individual partners (members) of the partnerships are. 
 If your partnership has a partner who is a New York State resident, or if the partnership has any income from New York State sources, it must file  Form IT-204 ,  Partnership Return . If your partnership carried on a business in New York City, it may also have to file New York City’s Form NYC-204,  Unincorporated Business Tax Return for Partnerships (including Limited Liability Companies) . Since New York State does not administer the New York City unincorporated business tax, do  not  file your Form NYC-204 with your state return. 
 Net operating loss (NOL) 
 For New York State income tax purposes, your NOL deduction is limited to the lesser of: 
 
 your federal NOL deduction, or 
 your federal taxable income calculated without the NOL deduction. 
 
 For additional information, see  Form IT-225-I , addition modification number A-215. 
 Innocent spouse relief 
 There are three types of innocent spouse relief: 
 
 innocent spouse 
 separation of liability 
 equitable relief 
 
 Innocent spouse 
 You may qualify for relief from full or partial tax liability on a joint return as an  innocent spouse  if: 
 
 there is an understatement of tax on a joint return because of an omission or error involving income, deduction, credit, or basis; 
 you can show that when you signed the return you did not know and had no reason to know of the understatement; and 
 taking into account all the facts and circumstances, it would be unfair to hold you liable for the understated tax. 
 
 Separation of liability 
 If you and your spouse or former spouse are no longer married, or are legally separated, or have lived apart at all times during the 12-month period prior to the date of filing for relief, you may also request a  separation of liability  for any understated tax on a joint return. 
 Equitable relief 
 If you do not qualify as an innocent spouse or for separation of liability, you may qualify for  equitable relief  if you can show that, considering all the facts and circumstances, you should not be held liable for any understatement or underpayment of tax. 
 For more information, see  Form IT-285 ,  Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (and Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief) . You may use Form IT-285 only for innocent spouse relief under the three circumstances stated above. Do  not  file Form IT-285 with your return. 
 If you want to disclaim your spouse’s defaulted governmental education, state university, or city university loan or past-due support or past-due legally enforceable debt owed to a New York State agency or a New York City tax warrant judgment debt because you do not want to apply your part of a joint refund or refundable credit to a debt owed solely by your spouse, use  Form IT-280 ,  Nonobligated Spouse Allocation . You must complete Form IT-280 and submit it with your original return when filed. See  Nonobligated spouse (Disclaiming your spouse’s debt)  .  
 Members of the armed forces 
 If you are a member of the military and a New York State resident, the amount of your military pay that is subject to federal income tax is also subject to New York income tax. However, see the  instructions for Form IT-225 , subtraction modification number S-118 for information on New York’s tax treatment of certain combat pay. 
 For more information, visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  military ). 
 Keep a copy of your tax records 
 Remember to keep a copy of your completed income tax return. Retain copies of your return for at least seven years after you file your return. We may also ask you to refer to a previously filed tax return for verification purposes if you: 
 
 call us for information about your return, 
 create an Online Services account, 
 check your refund status, or 
 view your 1099-G information. 
 
 Also keep copies of any books, records, schedules, statements, or other related documents. The Tax Department may ask you to provide copies of these records after you have filed your income tax returns. 
 Amending your return 
 The deadline or due date to amend your return depends on the reason you are amending. 
 
 If you want to claim credit for, or a refund of, an overpayment, you must file an amended return within three years of the date that you filed the original return, or within two years of the date that you paid the tax, whichever is later. 
 If you file an amended federal return, you must also file an amended New York State return within 90 days from the date you file your amended federal return. 
 If the IRS makes changes to your federal return, you must report those changes to the New York State Tax Department within 90 days from the date the IRS makes its final determination. 
 
 You must also file an amended return to: 
 
 correct any error on your original state return, 
 file a protective claim, or 
 report an NOL carryback. 
 
 What form to use 
 Use  Form IT-201-X  if your original return was Form IT-201. Also use Form IT-201-X if you mistakenly filed Form IT-203, but you were a full-year resident. Use  Form IT-203-X  if you mistakenly filed Form IT-201, but you were a nonresident or part-year resident. 
 Paid preparer information 
 For information relating to the Tax Preparer Registration Program, the signing of returns by a paid preparer (anyone you pay to prepare your return), e-file mandate for paid preparers, and other requirements relating to paid preparers, see  Publication 58 ,  Information for Income Tax Return Preparers,  and  Tips for hiring a tax preparer  or visit  www.tax.ny.gov   ( search:  Tips ). 
 
   How to calculate your 2025 New York State tax 
 To calculate your 2025 New York State tax, use the table below to determine the correct method. 
  How to calculate your 2025 New York State tax 
 
 
 If your: 
  and your:  
 then use the: 
 
 
 NYS adjusted gross income is $107,650 or  less  (line 33) 
  NYS taxable income is   less   than $65,000 (line 38)     
  NYS tax table  
 
 
 NYS taxable income is $65,000 or  more  (line 38) 
  NYS tax rate schedule  
 
 
 NYS adjusted gross income is  more  than $107,650 (line 33) 
  NYS tax computation  
 
 
 
 
   New York State tax rate schedule 
 If your New York adjusted gross income amount on Form IT-201, line 33, is more than $107,650, see  Tax computation – New York adjusted gross income of more than $107,650  below to calculate your New York State tax. 
  Married filing jointly and qualifying surviving spouse—filing status ② and ⑤ 
 
 
 If line 38 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $17,150 
   
   
 4% 
 of line 38 
   
 
 
 17,150 
 23,600 
 $686 
 plus 
 4.5% 
 of the excess over 
 $17,150 
 
 
 23,600 
 27,900 
 976 
 plus 
 5.25% 
 of the excess over 
 23,600 
 
 
 27,900 
 161,550 
 1,202 
 plus 
 5.5% 
 of the excess over 
 27,900 
 
 
 161,550 
 323,200 
 8,553 
 plus 
 6% 
 of the excess over 
 161,550 
 
 
 323,200 
 2,155,350 
 18,252 
 plus 
 6.85% 
 of the excess over 
 323,200 
 
 
 2,155,350 
 5,000,000 
 143,754 
 plus 
 9.65% 
 of the excess over 
 2,155,350 
 
 
 5,000,000 
 25,000,000 
 418,263 
 plus 
 10.3% 
 of the excess over 
 5,000,000 
 
 
 25,000,000 
 ---- 
 2,478,263 
 plus 
 10.9% 
 of the excess over 
 25,000,000 
 
 
 
   
  Single and married filing separately—filing status ① and ③ 
 
 
 If line 38 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $8,500 
   
   
 4% 
 of line 38 
   
 
 
 8,500 
 11,700 
 $340 
 plus 
 4.5% 
 of the excess over 
 $8,500 
 
 
 11,700 
 13,900 
 484 
 plus 
 5.25% 
 of the excess over 
 11,700 
 
 
 13,900 
 80,650 
 600 
 plus 
 5.5% 
 of the excess over 
 13,900 
 
 
 80,650 
 215,400 
 4,271 
 plus 
 6% 
 of the excess over 
 80,650 
 
 
 215,400 
 1,077,550 
 12,356 
 plus 
 6.85% 
 of the excess over 
 215,400 
 
 
 1,077,550 
 5,000,000 
 71,413 
 plus 
 9.65% 
 of the excess over 
 1,077,550 
 
 
 5,000,000 
 25,000,000 
 449,929 
 plus 
 10.3% 
 of the excess over 
 5,000,000 
 
 
 25,000,000 
 ---- 
 2,509,929 
 plus 
 10.9% 
 of the excess over 
 25,000,000 
 
 
 
   
  Head of household—filing status ④ 
 
 
 If line 38 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $12,800 
   
   
 4% 
 of line 38 
   
 
 
 12,800 
 17,650 
 $512 
 plus 
 4.5% 
 of the excess over 
 $12,800 
 
 
 17,650 
 20,900 
 730 
 plus 
 5.25% 
 of the excess over 
 17,650 
 
 
 20,900 
 107,650 
 901 
 plus 
 5.5% 
 of the excess over 
 20,900 
 
 
 107,650 
 269,300 
 5,672 
 plus 
 6% 
 of the excess over 
 107,650 
 
 
 269,300 
 1,616,450 
 15,371 
 plus 
 6.85% 
 of the excess over 
 269,300 
 
 
 1,616,450 
 5,000,000 
 107,651 
 plus 
 9.65% 
 of the excess over 
 1,616,450 
 
 
 5,000,000 
 25,000,000 
 434,163 
 plus 
 10.3% 
 of the excess over 
 5,000,000 
 
 
 25,000,000 
 ---- 
 2,494,163 
 plus 
 10.9% 
 of the excess over 
 25,000,000 
 
 
 
 
   Tax computation—New York adjusted gross income of more than $107,650 
 New York State tax 
 Find your New York State tax by using the correct tax computation worksheet within your filing status (see below). 
 Married filing jointly and qualifying surviving spouse 
  Tax computation worksheet 1 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $107,650, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  $161,550 or less , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Multiply line 2 by 5.5% (0.055) ( Stop:  If the line 1 amount is  $157,650 or more , skip lines 4 through 8 and enter the line 3 amount on line 9) 
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 4.  ______________  
 
 
 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 
 5. ______________ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $107,650 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Divide line 6 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 7.  ______________  
 
 
 8. Multiply line 5 by line 7 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Add lines 4 and 8.  Enter here and on line 39 . 
 9. ______________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 2 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $161,550, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $161,550 but not more than $323,200 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount 
 4. _____ 333 ______ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. _____ 807 ______ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $161,550 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 3 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $323,200, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $323,200 but not more than $2,155,350 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount 
 4. ____ 1,140 _____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount 
 5. ____ 2,747 _____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $323,200 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 4 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $2,155,350, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $2,155,350 but not more than $5,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the    New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount 
 4. ____ 3 , 887 _____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount 
 5. ___ 60,350 _____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $2,155,350 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 5 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $5,000,000, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $5,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount 
 4. ____ 64,237 ____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. ____ 32,500 ____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $5,000,000 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 6 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $25,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 1.  ______________  
 
 
 2. Multiply line 1 by 10.9% (0.109).  Enter here and on line 39.  
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 
 Single and married filing separately 
  Tax computation worksheet 7 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $107,650, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  $215,400 or less , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Multiply line 2 by 6% (0.06) ( Stop:  If the line 1 amount is  $157,650 or more , skip lines 4 through 8 and enter the line 3 amount on line 9) 
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 4.  ______________  
 
 
 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 
 5. ______________ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $107,650  
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Divide line 6 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 7.  ______________  
 
 
 8. Multiply line 5 by line 7 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Add lines 4 and 8.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 9. ______________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 8 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $215,400, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $215,400 but not more than $1,077,550 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount  
 4. ______ 568 _____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. _____ 1,831 _____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $215,400 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 9 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $1,077,550, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $1,077,550 but not more than $5,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount  
 4. ____ 2,399 ______ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. ____ 30,172 _____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $1,077,550 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 10 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $5,000,000, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $5,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount  
 4. ____ 32,571 ____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. ____ 32,500 ____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $5,000,000 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 11 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $25,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 1.  ______________  
 
 
 2. Multiply line 1 by 10.9% (0.109).  Enter here and on line 39.  
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 
 Head of household 
  Tax computation worksheet 12 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $107,650, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  $269,300 or less , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Multiply line 2 by 6% (0.06) ( Stop:  If the line 1 amount is  $157,650 or more , skip lines 4 through 8 and enter the line 3 amount on line 9) 
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 4.  ______________  
 
 
 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 
 5. ______________ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $107,650 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Divide line 6 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 7.  ______________  
 
 
 8. Multiply line 5 by line 7 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Add lines 4 and 8.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 9. ______________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 13 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $269,300, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $269,300 but not more than $1,616,450 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount  
 4. _____ 787 ______ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. _____ 2,289 _____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $269,300 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 14 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $1,616,450, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $1,616,450 but not more than $5,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount  
 4. ______ 3,076 ____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount  
 5. _____ 45,261 ____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $1,616,450 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 15 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $5,000,000, but not more than $25,000,000 , and your taxable income (line 38) is  more than $5,000,000  then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your New York adjusted gross income from line 33 
 1. ______________ 
 
 
 2. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 3. Enter your New York State tax on the line 2 amount from the  New York State tax rate schedule  
 3. ______________ 
 
 
 4. Recapture Base amount 
 4. _____ 48,337 ____ 
 
 
 5. Incremental Benefit amount 
 5. _____ 32,500 ____ 
 
 
 6. Enter the excess of line 1 over $5,000,000 
 6. ______________ 
 
 
 7. Enter the lesser of line 6 or $50,000 
 7. ______________ 
 
 
 8. Divide line 7 by $50,000 and round the result to the fourth decimal place 
 8.  ______________  
 
 
 9. Multiply line 5 by line 8 
 9.  ______________  
 
 
 10. Add lines 3, 4, and 9.  Enter here and on line 39.  
 10. _____________ 
 
 
 
   
  Tax computation worksheet 16 
 
 
 If your New York adjusted gross income (line 33) is  more than $25,000,000 , then you must calculate your tax using this worksheet. 
 
 
 1. Enter your taxable income from line 38 
 1.  ______________  
 
 
 2. Multiply line 1 by 10.9% (0.109).  Enter here and on line 39.  
 2. ______________ 
 
 
 
 
   How to calculate your 2025 New York City tax 
 Use the table below to determine the correct method to calculate your 2025 New York City tax. 
  How to calculate your 2025 New York City tax 
 
 
 If your: 
 then use the: 
 
 
 NYC taxable income  less  than $65,000 (line 47) 
  NYC tax table  
 
 
 NYC taxable income $65,000 or  more  (line 47) 
  NYC tax rate schedule  
 
 
 
   New York City tax rate schedule 
  Married filing jointly and qualifying surviving spouse—filing status ② and ⑤ 
 
 
 If line 47 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $21,600 
   
   
 3.078% 
 of line 47 
   
 
 
 21,600 
 45,000 
 $665 
 plus 
 3.762% 
 of the excess over 
 $21,600 
 
 
 45,000 
 90,000 
 1,545 
 plus 
 3.819% 
 of the excess over 
 45,000 
 
 
 90,000 
 ---- 
 3,264 
 plus 
 3.876% 
 of the excess over 
 90,000 
 
 
 
   
  Single and married filing separately—filing status ① and ③ 
 
 
 If line 47 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $12,000 
   
   
 3.078% 
 of line 47 
   
 
 
 12,000 
 25,000 
 $369 
 plus 
 3.762% 
 of the excess over 
 $12,000 
 
 
 25,000 
 50,000 
 858 
 plus 
 3.819% 
 of the excess over 
 25,000 
 
 
 50,000 
 ---- 
 1,813 
 plus 
 3.876% 
 of the excess over 
 50,000 
 
 
 
   
  Head of household—filing status ④ 
 
 
 If line 47 is: 
 The tax is: 
 
 
 over 
 but not over 
 
 
 $0 
 $14,400 
   
   
 3.078% 
 of line 47 
   
 
 
 14,400 
 30,000 
 $443 
 plus 
 3.762% 
 of the excess over 
 $14,400 
 
 
 30,000 
 60,000 
 1,030 
 plus 
 3.819% 
 of the excess over 
 30,000 
 
 
 60,000 
 ---- 
 2,176 
 plus 
 3.876% 
 of the excess over 
 60,000 
 
 
 
 
   When to file/Important dates 
 April 15, 2026 
 Date by which you must file your 2025 New York State income tax return and pay any amounts you owe without interest or penalty. If you cannot file by this date, you can get an automatic 6‑month extension of time to file (to October 15, 2026) by filing  Form IT‑370 ,  Application for Automatic Six‑Month Extension of Time to File for Individuals . Form IT-370 must be filed, along with payment for any tax due, on or before the due date of your return (April 15, 2026). See  Need help? . 
 June 15, 2026 
 Date by which you must file your 2025 New York State income tax return if you qualify to file your federal income tax return on June 15, 2026, because: 
 
 you are a U.S. citizen or resident noncitizen and live outside the U.S. and Puerto Rico and your main place of business or post of duty is outside the U.S. and Puerto Rico, or 
 you are in the military service outside the U.S. and Puerto Rico when your 2025 return is due. The time to pay your New York State, New York City and Yonkers income tax, and any New York State or local sales or use tax is similarly automatically extended. 
 
  Military Personnel:  For more information on extensions of time to file, visit  www.tax.ny.gov  (search:  military ). 
 October 15, 2026 
 If you filed  Form IT-370 ,  Application for Automatic Six-month Extension of Time to File for Individuals , and paid any tax you owed, you must file your 2025 income tax return by October 15, 2026, to avoid penalties and interest calculated from the original due date of your return (April 15, 2026). 
 April 15, 2026, June 15, 2026, September 15, 2026, January 15, 2027 
 These are the due dates for 2026 estimated tax payments. Generally, you must pay estimated tax if you expect to owe at least $300 of New York State or New York City or Yonkers income tax after deducting tax withheld and credits you are entitled to claim, or any amount of metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax. 
   Statute of limitations 
 Generally, you must file a claim for a credit or refund of an overpayment of income tax within the later of three years from the time you filed the return or two years from the time you paid the tax. If you did not file a return, you must file the claim for a credit or refund within two years from the time you paid the tax. 
   Need help? 
 Visit our website at  www.tax.ny.gov  
 
 get information and manage your taxes online 
 check for new online services and features 
 
    Telephone assistance   
 
 
 Automated income tax refund status: 
 518-457-5149 
 
 
 Personal Income Tax Information Center: 
 518-457-5181 
 
 
 To order forms and publications: 
 518-457-5431 
 
 
 Text Telephone (TTY) or TDD equipment users:  
 Dial 7-1-1 for the New York Relay Service 
 
 
 
   Where to file 
 If enclosing a payment (check or money order with Form IT-201-V), mail your return to: 
 STATE PROCESSING CENTER PO BOX 15555 ALBANY NY 12212-5555 
 If not enclosing a payment, mail your return to: 
 STATE PROCESSING CENTER PO BOX 61000 ALBANY NY 12261-0001 
 If you choose to use a private delivery service instead of the U.S. Postal Service to file your return, see  Publication 55 ,  Designated Private Delivery Services  for more information. 
			
			
			 Updated:  April 3, 2026  
		 
								 

					 
					 
						 
							 
								 Department of  
								 Taxation and Finance 
							 
							 
								 
							 Get help 
							 
								  Contact us  
								  Help resources  
								  Freedom of Information Law (FOIL)  
								  Taxpayer Rights Advocate  
								  Report fraud  
								  Feedback  
							 
						  
							 Website 
							 
								  Site map  
								  Privacy  
								  Security  
								  Disclaimer  
							 
						  
							 About us 
							 
								  About us  
								  Employment opportunities  
								  Press  
								  Email policy  
								  Accessibility  
								  Regulations and regulatory actions  
							 
						  
							 Language assistance 
							 
								  Language access  
								  Español  
								  繁體中文  
								  Русский  
								  יידיש  
								  বাংলা  
								  한국어  
								  Free interpretation  
								  Kreyòl ayisyen  
								  Italiano  
								  العربية  
								  Polski  
								  Français  
								  اردو  
							 
						 
						
							 
							 
								 Connect with us 
								 
									  
										 
										 Subscribe to NYS Department of Tax and Finance 
									  
                                      
										 
										 NYS Department of Tax and Finance on LinkedIn 
									  
									  
										 
										 NYS Department of Tax and Finance on Facebook 
									  
									  
										 
										 NYS Department of Tax and Finance on Instagram 
									  
									  
										 
										 NYS Department of Tax and Finance on X 
									  
									  
										 
										 NYS Department of Tax and Finance on YouTube 
									  
								 
							 
							 
								 
                                	 
                                    	  Register To Vote   
                                      	 Sign up online or download and mail in your application. 
                                  	 
									 
										  Vaccinate NY   
										 Get the facts about the COVID-19 vaccine. 
									 
									 
										  Donate Life   
										 Become an organ donor today! 
									 
								 
							 
						 
					 
				 
				 
					  
				 			
              
              
			 
		 
	 
 